The mining company engaged Sir Lynton Crosby’s firm to push anti-renewables
message and counter anti-coal activists



The multinational mining giant Glencore spent millions bankrolling a secret,
globally coordinated campaign to prop up coal demand by undermining
environmental activists, influencing politicians and spreading sophisticated
pro-coal messaging on social media.



An investigation by Guardian Australia can reveal the covert campaign, dubbed
“Project Caesar”, was orchestrated by world-renowned political operatives at
the C|T Group, the firm founded by Sir Lynton Crosby and Mark Textor.



The C|T Group used teams in Sydney and London to further Glencore’s interests
across the globe, including in Australia, according to multiple sources with
knowledge of the project and documents seen by Guardian Australia.



Project Caesar began in early 2017 with an annual warchest of between £4m and
£7m. Glencore has confirmed the project’s existence but said it moved to shut
it down last month to “ensure alignment” with its recent decision to limit
coal production for environmental reasons.



The campaign aimed to engage key politicians, both to gauge their views on
coal and attempt to convince them of its continuing value.



Intelligence was collected about key coal detractors, including Greenpeace and
350.org, detailing their budgets, social media reach, and issues that could be
used to embarrass or undermine them.



A sophisticated digital campaign was mounted to help shift public sentiment
towards coal, using messaging informed by research, focus groups and polling
conducted in multiple countries.



Campaign teams helped set up online grassroots groups to push positive
messaging about clean coal technology, attack renewables and criticise the
Australian Labor party. The practice is commonly known as astroturfing.



One source with knowledge of Project Caesar said it was linked to Energy in
Australia, a Facebook group and website that attacks renewables, while
supporting high efficiency, low emissions (Hele) coal plants through data,
memes, graphics and video.



Posts blame renewables for blackouts in South Australia and Victoria, link
renewable subsidies to “Saudi billionaires”, and stress a link between solar,
wind and rising power prices. The group celebrated the formation of the Monash
Forum, a group of federal MPs who speak in support of coal, including
Coalition MPs Craig Kelly, George Christensen, and Tony Abbott.



Other posts warn of widespread blackouts due to the planned closure of the
Liddell power plant in NSW, and tell followers that wind turbines are
“desecrating our Diggers’ graves” in France, using photoshopped imagery of
wind farms towering over an Anzac memorial. The wind farm, which was only in
planning stages at the time, never went ahead.



Energy in Australia’s content is slickly-produced and its reach is
significant. The Facebook page alone is followed by more than 20,000 people.
Paid Facebook ads are also used to push posts into the feeds of other users.



Both the Energy in Australia website and Facebook group were taken offline
following questions to Glencore and the C|T Group about the links to Project
Caesar.



The sites are publicly authorised by a former Queensland Liberal National
Party state MP, Matt McEachan.



When contacted by the Guardian, he could not say who else might be producing
content for the group, aside from himself and other volunteers.



McEachan would not say who was providing funding, and said he did not know
whether the C|T Group was involved in producing content for the site.



“I can’t really give you a comment or statement with any kind of authority in
that respect,” he said.



Energy in Australia is similar in design and tone to a second pro-coal
website, Australian Power Project, which was revealed in 2017 to have links to
an employee of the C|T Group. Guardian Australia has found no evidence to
suggest the Australian Power Project is part of Project Caesar.



Project Caesar also had a significant traditional media component, seeking to
amplify and spread pro-coal voices and messaging in mainstream media sources.



The project had an overarching strategy of shifting the emotion and tone of
the energy debate to favour coal by using arguments that were personally
relevant to its target audience. Its messaging was centred on themes of cost,
reliability and family security.



The campaign contrasts with Glencore’s more recent statement that it would cap
global coal output, in part due to investor pressure to act on climate change.



It also potentially contrasted with the aims of another C|T Group client, the
Liberal party, whose then leader Malcolm Turnbull was attempting to forge
ahead with new reliability and emissions reduction guarantees, which would
have reduced Australia’s reliance on coal.



In a statement, Glencore confirmed it had engaged the C|T Group on the
project, which it said used research, focus groups, and polling to “better
understand public views on coal”.



Glencore also confirmed it deployed a “proactive communications campaign”
designed to counter the efforts of environmental activists.



It said the campaign complied with all relevant laws – Guardian Australia is
not suggesting otherwise.



“The project also mandated CT Group to conduct a proactive communication
campaign on coal in compliance with all relevant legal and regulatory
requirements,” the company said in a statement.



“The project’s objective was to convey simple facts about coal and in
particular to counter misinformation from environmental activists.”



“Our business continues to engage with a range of stakeholders on the role
that coal plays in socio-economic development and enabling access to reliable
energy. We also acknowledge the need to transition to a low carbon economy.
Glencore’s portfolio of commodities will allow the company to play a key role
in this transition.”



Glencore said it told C|T Group to wrap up the project in mid-February to
align with its announcement on climate change and the decision to cap coal
output.



The C|T Group declined to comment, other than to say:



“All information about our clients is treated with the strictest confidence.”



The revelations shed new light on the C|T Group’s inner workings. Crosby, one
of its founders, was knighted by the former UK prime minister, David Cameron,
and has run the UK Conservative party’s last four general election campaigns.



The strategies employed for Glencore in Project Caesar appear strikingly
similar to those offered in a pitch for a £5.5m campaign designed to cancel
the 2022 Qatar football World Cup.



The World Cup project, dubbed Project Ball, proposed setting up full-time war
rooms across the world, lobbying friendly politicians, academics and
journalists, and pushing messaging on social media and astroturfing sites.
Project Ball was pitched to a Qatari opposition figure living in London in an
attempt to delegitimise the Qatari government and pressure Fifa to “restart
the bidding process” for the World Cup hosting rights.



Project Caesar took place as Glencore made other aggressive plays to protect
its Australian interests.



In 2017, Glencore mounted a surveillance operation targeting CFMEU members who
were picketing its Oaky North mine in central Queensland. Its “clandestine and
quasi-military activity” was described as “appalling” by Australia’s
industrial relations umpire, the Fair Work Commission.



Glencore employed private investigators to secretly surveil union members
using long-lens cameras and video. A map of the homes of key CFMEU members in
the nearby town of Tieri was drawn up. Operatives took notes about their
movements, reporting back to Glencore on a 24-hour basis.



“Nil Glencore staff members at the piquet [sic] lines in the past 24hrs,” one
briefing note obtained by Guardian Australia read.



“Approximately 30 vehicles located at CFMEU guide hall 0800 hours this
morning.”



Glencore also launched an operation codenamed Project Zuckerberg to find
evidence of potential social media policy breaches in discussions in private
Facebook groups used by CFMEU officials at Oaky North.



Documents and images seen by Guardian Australia show Glencore also asked a
contractor to enter the lodgings of Oaky North workers when they called in
sick. Photos of their empty beds were taken to help build evidence against the
workers.



Guardian Australia has not found evidence to suggest the actions taken against
the CFMEU Oaky North members were linked to Project Caesar.



Glencore’s actions in Africa have also come under close scrutiny in recent
years.



The Paradise Papers, a leaked cache of millions of documents, showed how the
commodities giant acted to further its mining interests in the Democratic
Republic of Congo.



The company engaged the mining magnate and Israeli billionaire Dan Gertler to
negotiate with the DRC government in 2009, giving him a $45m loan in pledged
shares repayable if agreement was not reached within three months. The loan
was repaid in 2010.



Gertler had previously been cited by a 2001 UN investigation that said he had
given DRC’s president $20m to buy weapons to help fight rebel groups in
exchange for a monopoly on the country’s diamonds. Gertler strongly denies the
allegations.

