People living near a copper smelting plant in Rouyn-Noranda, Que., are
demanding to know why it's taking the government so long to address their
concerns about air pollution, in the wake of a new study that shows their
children are being overexposed to lead and carcinogenic arsenic.



Public health and Environment Ministry officials met residents Tuesday evening
to share the results of a study carried out on children in the Notre-Dame
neighbourhood, near the smelter that has been in operation since 1927.



Some people left the meeting feeling frustrated over the amount of scientific
information they were being asked to absorb without much time for questions.



"Each time I go outside I have this itch in my throat. I feel uncomfortable,
and then I look toward the chimneys," said Manon Lessard-Bélanger, who lives
two kilometres south of the Horne Smelter.



Concerns about air and soil pollution from the smelter date back many years.
For more than two decades, adults and children have been tested to check their
exposure levels to lead and arsenic.



But because the tests are so intrusive, until 2018, public health officials
had not been regularly asking for blood, urine or fingernail samples,
according to Dr. Omobola Sobanjo, a medical consultant with the Abitibi-
Témiscamingue public health authority.



In 2018, however, they took fingernail samples from about half the
neighbourhood's children between the ages of nine months and six years.



They found nine of the 34 children tested had concentrations of arsenic of 800
to 4,400 nanograms per gram.



The average for all the children tested was 3.7 times higher than normal. As a
basis of comparison, public health authorities also tested children in the
nearby town of Amos. Those children had an average arsenic presence of 110
nanograms per gram.



Researcher Daniel Proulx said children's health is a good indicator of the
overall health of a population.



"Children are the most vulnerable to effects of lead and arsenic when it comes
to the development of their nervous system," said Proulx, who led the study.



"When things are good with children, with the different contaminants, you can
generally presume the rest of the population is also well."



Scientific literature shows that exposure to high levels of arsenic can cause
symptoms ranging from hair loss to liver damage and cancer, while exposure to
lead can lead to brain damage.



Sobanjo said the levels of pollutants found in the air and soil near the
smelter, however, are not nearly high enough to signal lead and arsenic
poisoning.



Still, she said, "As a public health doctor, I'm concerned that 50 per cent of
my population, of the children in that neighbourhood, are exposed."



Residents who attended the meeting were given a pamphlet with tips on how to
limit their exposure to contaminants.



Those tips include keeping windows closed on windy days, avoiding wearing
outdoor shoes indoors and keeping children out of the room while vacuuming.



The Horne smelter is one of the world's largest producers of copper and other
precious metals, and it is North America's biggest recycler of electronic
components.



Glencore, which bought the smelter in 2013, plans to invest $54 million by
2021 to reduce all emissions, according to spokesperson Pierre-Philippe
Dupont.



"We've added many domes so we can manipulate the products inside a closed
environment, instead of outdoors," said Dupont.



The company has also invested in technology to capture emissions before they
are released.



Carrie-Lynn Plante, whose two children attend daycare and school near the
smelter, said she had concerns going into the meeting. But she said overall,
she is relieved to see the company is taking measures to reduce emissions.



"I'm confident that it's a wake-up call. It took so long for them to act, and
now we're going to be seeing major action," said Plante.



"And if we don't, then they'll have to answer to us."



Even after Glencore's investments to reduce pollution, arsenic emission levels
will be capped at a level that is 10 times higher than what provincial
authorities had demanded in 2004.



At that time, the province gave the smelter's previous owner, Xstrata, 18
months to get its emission levels to 10 nanograms per cubic metre.



But over the years, the ministry raised that cap to 200 nanograms per cubic
metre.



The 2004 demand "was based on the levels of reference for arsenic in the air,
and not on what it was technically possible to do," said Annie Cassista, a
mining expert with Quebec's Environment Ministry.



By 2021, the cap will be set at 100 nanograms per cubic metre. By comparison,
the concentration of arsenic across Quebec normally hovers around 1 to 2
nanograms per cubic metre.



Cassista said the ministry does not have any plans to address the accumulation
of arsenic or lead emissions in Rouyn-Noranda and further away.



A federal database of pollutants shows the Horne Smelter has released 936,000
kilograms (or 936 tonnes) of arsenic into the air since 1993. The amount of
lead adds up to 2,710,000 kilograms (2,710 tonnes).



To encourage thoughtful and respectful conversations, first and last names
will appear with each submission to CBC/Radio-Canada's online communities
(except in children and youth-oriented communities). Pseudonyms will no longer
be permitted.



By submitting a comment, you accept that CBC has the right to reproduce and
publish that comment in whole or in part, in any manner CBC chooses. Please
note that CBC does not endorse the opinions expressed in comments. Comments on
this story are moderated according to our Submission Guidelines. Comments are
welcome while open. We reserve the right to close comments at any time.



Join the conversation Create account



Already have an account?



Audience Relations, CBC  
P.O. Box 500 Station A  
Toronto, ON  
Canada, M5W 1E6



Toll-free (Canada only):  
1-866-306-4636



It is a priority for CBC to create a website that is accessible to all
Canadians including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive
challenges.



Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered
on CBC Gem.



