The Legault government is threatening to close the Horne smelter in Rouyn-
Noranda if it does not significantly reduce its arsenic emissions.



The company currently releases up to 100 nanograms of arsenic per cubic meter
into the air, 33 times higher than the Quebec standard of 3 ng/m3.



On Tuesday, the government revealed that the smelter, owned by the
multinational Glencore, had offered in May to lower its emissions to 60 ng/m3
(or 20 times the provincial standard).



"However, this standard is still too high for us," said Ewan Sauves, press
secretary to Premier François Legault. "We have asked the company to go back
to the drawing board."



"Our priority is the health and safety of citizens. If the company is not able
to reduce its emissions and get closer to the Quebec standard, we do not rule
out closing the plant," he added.



Much has been written about the air quality issue in Rouyn-Noranda. On July 6,
Quebec's public health director Dr. Luc Boileau declared that the status quo
was no longer acceptable.



In the past, the "Liberals have given up" on Glencore, according to Sauves.
"Fortunately, this time it's not the Liberals who are negotiating the new
certificate. We won't make the same mistake again."



In a press scrum in Quebec City, Liberal Leader Dominique Anglade said she
hoped the company would "move towards" the Quebec standard of 3 ng/m3 "as
quickly as possible."



"Today, we have information that we did not have 20 years ago. We know the
impacts," she said, adding that "the Quebec standard is for everyone."



The co-spokesperson for Québec solidaire, Gabriel Nadeau-Dubois, also deplored
the fact that the smelter is negotiating with the government "its right to
pollute more than others."



"Glencore must respect Quebec's air quality standards, period," he said. "The
health of the children of Rouyn-Noranda is no less valuable than the health of
... people everywhere in Quebec."



Neither the Quebec Liberal Party nor Québec solidaire are talking about
forcing the closure of the Horne smelter, saying they believe the company will
eventually meet Quebec's air quality standards.



Both parties also rejected the idea of helping the company financially until
it reaches its targets.



_\-- This report by The Canadian Press was first published in French on July
26, 2022._



A four-year-old child with Down syndrome spent about 40 hours in an Ontario
emergency room after coming down with a serious respiratory illness.





A one-year-old child has survived a hit-and-run after a mother's stroller was
struck by a vehicle while she was crossing the street in Montreal's Outremont
borough last week, police say. The infant was not injured and investigators
are searching for the suspect vehicle.





A helicopter pilot and a meteorologist who worked for a North Carolina
television station died Tuesday when a news helicopter crashed along a
Charlotte-area interstate, with police praising the pilot for heroically
avoiding the roadway in his final moments.





Public Safety Minister Marco Mendicino took the stand at the Public Order
Emergency Commission on Tuesday, testifying about his involvement in the
federal government's handling of the 'Freedom Convoy' protests and invocation
of the Emergencies Act. Here's a rundown of some of the notable takeaways from
Mendicino's testimony.





A new survey conducted by a dating app company suggests the top dating trends
that it says will define dating in 2023.





The Liberal government prompted applause and anger on Tuesday by proposing an
evergreen definition of a prohibited assault-style firearm for inclusion in
gun-control legislation being studied by a House of Commons committee.





New research has indicated that COVID-19 may be correlated with lasting
changes in the human brain, even months after recovery.





An Alberta paramedic who responded to a horrific crash where she treated a
severely injured teenager, not realizing it was her own daughter, is mourning
the loss of her child.





Mental Health and Addictions Minister Caroyln Bennett says Conservative Leader
Pierre Poilievre's comments about safe drug consumptions sites are
"irresponsible" and "misguided."





A four-year-old child with Down syndrome spent about 40 hours in an Ontario
emergency room after coming down with a serious respiratory illness.





Four people are dead after a head-on collision near Peterborough on Tuesday
afternoon.





The cause of the leak comes from a hole in a combined sewage pipe, the city
says, and as a result, 50 or so Hamilton residences have been flushing
directly into a storm sewer leading into the harbour.





Three Atlantic provinces will be subject to the federal consumer carbon price
next summer, with their residents getting the quarterly rebate cheques meant
to prevent households from being worse off financially as a result of the
program.





Codiac Regional RCMP says the body of a man with no fixed address was found
inside a public washroom steps from Moncton City Hall just after midnight
Tuesday.





New numbers from Statistics Canada show the homicide rate decreased in all
three Maritime provinces in 2021, but gang-related killings increased in Nova
Scotia and New Brunswick.





An early afternoon head-on collision near Tillsonburg, Ont. sent two people to
hospital, with one taken by air ambulance to the Victoria Hospital trauma unit
in London, Ont.





A 15-year-old girl has been charged in relation to a stabbing incident that
occurred at H.B. Beal Secondary School on Monday, London police said.





Ontario education support workers will have until early December to decide
whether or not to accept a new contract with the provincial government.





Police in Greater Sudbury are dealing with a mystery after a gunshot victim
was dropped off at Health Sciences North late Monday evening.





The Nipissing West Detachment of the Ontario Provincial Police has identified
the remains of two deceased people located following a fire in West Nipissing
on Nov. 2.





A recent flood at Huckleberries Chocolatiers in Sudbury came at the worst
possible time: the busy Christmas shopping season.





Alberta's premier is dipping into the province's surplus to help people
struggling with the rising cost of living with rebates, tax breaks and cheques
bound for families, seniors and people with disabilities.





Premier Danielle Smith took to the airwaves Tuesday evening, offering
financial supports to Albertans to help them get through the next six months.





Calgary police are looking to the public for help in the hunt for a suspect in
a recent string of sexual assaults in the city's northwest.





A new survey is shedding light on the impact of rising costs.





With the night closing in, Six Nations Fire and Emergency Services were able
to rescue a young dog that was stuck on a piece of ice.





Waterloo regional police are searching for a missing 15-year-old teen from
Kitchener.





BC Children's Hospital is seeing a "surge storm" in young patients, prompting
the facility to open an overflow unit for their emergency department.





Members of the Vancouver Police Department created and shared "a video
appearing to ridicule and minimize the severity of sexual harassment
investigations ongoing within the VPD," according to a report from the
province's police watchdog.





A teenager has died after being stabbed in the parking lot of a Surrey high
school Tuesday afternoon, according to authorities.





Alberta's premier is dipping into the province's surplus to help people
struggling with the rising cost of living with rebates, tax breaks and cheques
bound for families, seniors and people with disabilities.





Premier Danielle Smith took to the airwaves Tuesday evening, offering
financial supports to Albertans to help them get through the next six months.





Documents released Tuesday by the public inquiry looking into the government's
decision to invoke the Emergencies Act last winter include text messages
between three federal cabinet ministers, including Intergovernmental Affairs
Minister Dominic LeBlanc.





A large family in Chatham-Kent is in need of donations following a house fire
that destroyed everything in their home earlier this week.





Windsor police have arrested and charged a 22-year-old man in connection with
a fatal hit-and-run crash.





Ontario education support workers will have until early December to decide
whether or not to accept a new contract with the provincial government.





The family of Shayne Turner believes the 31-year-old man would still be alive
if he had been provided a detox treatment bed.





Saskatchewan's industry carbon pricing plan has been approved by the federal
government.





A group of Regina students are making their voices heard on the issue of non-
accessible public transit due to high prices.





A special board meeting of Ottawa-Carleton District School Board trustees has
ended without a decision on whether to impose a mask mandate.





Ottawa Public Health is reporting a major jump in the testing positivity for
influenza in the city.





Tenants of a Russell, Ont. building were shocked to learn the sharp increase
to their rent is allowed because of an exception announced by the Ontario
government in 2018.





Cathleen Balon says she was going to take her daughter Nykera Brown to a detox
centre in Moose Jaw on Tuesday November 15 to help her with addictions she’d
been struggling with for over five years.





A Saskatoon rendering plant is apologizing for a pile of pigs that were left
outside its business on Monday.





More than a month after the province announced plans to create a centralized
online school system, the provincial teachers' union wants answers.





CTV News Programs



Local News



© 2022  All rights reserved. Use of this Website assumes acceptance of Terms &
Conditions and Privacy Policy

