Resource World Magazine



investment opportunities and news



Resource World Magazine



The Mount Newman railway line in Western Australia. Source: BHP Billiton Ltd.



**BHP Billiton Ltd.** [BHP-NYSE; BHPLF-OTCPK] has suspended all iron ore rail
operations in Western Australia after a train carrying iron ore took off
without the driver on board and travelled across the Pilbara outback before it
was stopped early Monday.



Local media reports said the train literally ran away after the driver briefly
stepped off the train to inspect an issue with a wagon. Before he was able to
get back on board, the train moved away with 268 wagons in tow and travelled
92 km before it was deliberately derailed by BHP.



Calculations by Reuters News service indicate that the train reached speeds of
about between 100 and 200 kilometres per hour before it was finally halted at
a location about 120 km from BHP’s Port Hedland Mine operations.



No-one else was travelling on the train at the time of the incident and there
were no reported injuries.



Prices in the spot seaborne iron ore market rebounded back over the US$75 per
tonne level overnight due to the derailment.



Western Australia Iron Ore (WAIO) is an integrated system of four processing
hubs and five mines, connected by more than 1,000 km of rail infrastructure
and port facilities in the Pilbara region of northern Western Australia.



At each mining hub – Newman, Yandi, Mining Area C, and Jimblebar – ore from
mines is crushed, beneficiated (where necessary) and blended to create high-
grade hematite lump and fine products. Iron ore products are then transported
along the Port Hedland-Newman Rail Line to the Finucane Island and Nelson
Point port facilities at Port Hedland.



The Mount Newman railway line is one of Australia’s longest private railway
lines.



The Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) is sending officers to the
Pilbara to investigate after the runaway train, loaded with ore from BHP’s
Newman Mine site, suffered significant damage in the derailment.



The incident occurred at around 4:40 a.m. on November 5, 2018, the ATSB report
said.



News of the forced derailment has put the spotlight on the WAIO reserve base
which is relatively concentrated, allowing development to be planned around
integrated mining hubs, which are connected to the mines and satellite
orebodies by conveyor or spur lines.



This approach enables the value of the installed infrastructure to be
maximized by using the same processing plant and rail infrastructure for a
number of orebodies.



There are four main WAIO joint ventures: Mt. Newman, Yandi, Mt. Goldsworthy
and Jimblebar. BHP’s interest in each of the joint ventures is 85%, with
Mitsui & Co. Ltd. of Japan and ITOUCHU Corp. (also of Japan) owning the
remaining 15%.



BHP, Mitsui and ITOCHU have also entered into separate joint venture
agreements with some customers that involve the sublease of parts of WAIO’s
existing mineral leases.



Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *



Comment *



Name *



Email *



Website





By Ian Foreman Graycliff Exploration Limited (CSE: GRAY) was formed in 2019
with the vision of creating a...



By Ian Foreman Cypress Development Corp. (TSXV: CYP) has recently become one
of, if not the,...



Victoria Gold's Eagle Gold Mine is ramping up to produce a quarter of a
million ounces...



The company hopes to produce as much as 10% of the world's current light rare
earth...



Since listing on the CSE in June of 2021, Headwater Gold Inc. has been working
at a...



When the odds of discovering a new mineral deposit are stacked against you at
10,000 to...



You have successfully subscribed to the newsletter



There was an error while trying to send your request. Please try again.

