**[1/2] **A view of a brine pool of a lithium mine on the Atacama salt flat in
the Atacama desert, Chile, August 16, 2018.REUTERS/Ivan Alvarado



SANTIAGO, March 10 (Reuters) - Chile's environmental regulator said on
Thursday it had fined Escondida mine, controlled by company BHP (BHP.AX), $8.2
million for damage caused by water extraction in the Salar de Atacama salt
flat.



Chile's SMA environmental watchdog had filed charges against the world's
largest copper mine in mid-2020, saying it had been exceeding the maximum
level allowed for water extraction since 2005, going over the 2019 limit
threefold.



"After processing the penalty procedure, the SMA endorsed the charge made
against the mining company, showing that the owner caused irreparable
environmental damage in Las Vegas de Tilopozo," the regulator said in a
statement.



BHP denied non-compliance with its environmental permit and said it is
evaluating further action.



"Escondida reiterates that at no time did it exceed what was approved by the
RCA in the Las Vegas de Tilopozo area, as has been reported to the authority
every six months since 2001," the company said in a statement.



BHP added that it ceased the extraction of water from high Andean aquifers in
2019 and currently operates only with desalinated water.



Water use has been a big point of tension with regulators for copper and
lithium miners in the Andean country, including lithium companies Albemarle
(ALB.N) and SQM .



Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



Mexican telecommunications giant America Movil will propose reclassifying
three of its share series to shareholders, the company said Tuesday.



Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s
largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every
day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to
professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry
events and directly to consumers.



Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor
expertise, and industry defining technology.



The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding
tax and compliance needs.



The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance
professionals.



Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised
workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.



Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and
insights from worldwide sources and experts.



Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover
hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.



All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of
exchanges and delays.



© 2022 Reuters. All rights reserved

