Use Google to translate the web site. We take no responsibility for the
accuracy of the translation.



Read this article in:



English



28 September, 2020Operations at the Cerrejón coal mine, owned by
multinationals Glencore, BHP and Anglo American, came to a halt on 31 August
when Sintarcarbón launched a strike, after rejecting a shift change that would
add 72 working days per year with no wage increase.



IndustriALL Global Union affiliate Sintracarbón is resisting the shift change
that would mean a reduction of 2,500 direct and indirect jobs. According to
Igor Díaz, Sintracarbón president, the decision was made without consulting
the union and is in violation of Colombian law.



"We are continuing the strike as the company has taken a firm position to
remove benefits that are historically included in our collective agreement,
and also wants to implement a shift system that will affect workers’ health,"



he said.



The new shift system – which workers call the “death shift” - will require
workers to work an additional 72 days per year with no wage increase. Workers
will move directly from day to night shifts without recovery time in a seven
day cycle, with no transport home between shifts. It will disrupt family life,
generate greater exhaustion and, as a result, increase workplace accidents.



The company argues that the shift change is necessary to make the mine
financially sustainable, and is not subject to negotiation. According to
Sintracarbón, the company is trying to reduce benefits in the collective
agreement to finance the cost of compensating the workers who will be
dismissed as a result of the introduction of the new shift.



The Ministry of Labour summoned the parties to open dialogue to resolve the
conflict, but Cerrejón did not respond. The union is willing to engage in
tripartite dialogue, but Cerrejón does not want the government to intervene.



During its meeting on 25 September, the Glencore global union network
expressed solidarity with members of Sintracarbón and called on Glencore to
urge Cerrejón to return to the negotiating table and seek a solution that
benefits workers, the community, the company and the country.



IndustriALL assistant general secretary Kemal Özkan says:



“It is unacceptable that Cerrejón uses workers to reduce costs, demanding that
they make huge concessions that will worsen their working conditions,
including the inhuman shift change. The IndustriALL global union family
supports the strike for justice, equality and dignity. Sintracarbón can count
on our support to ensure justice is done in the workplace.



“In accordance with the workers’ demands, Cerrejón must return to the
negotiation table to find solutions in everyone’s interest. Otherwise,
IndustriALL will continue to take action vis-à-vis the company's customers and
major shareholders.”



Cerrejón produces coal for export to utility companies around the world.



Colombia



Mining



Health and safety



Violation



Workers' rights



IndustriALL Global Union’s affiliates represent over 50 million workers in 140
countries in the mining, energy and manufacturing sectors.



We take up the fight for better working conditions and trade union rights
around the world.



Join the movement and follow us on:



For questions and press enquiries:



© Copyright 2018 - IndustriALL - We care about your personal information and
data. Take a look at our Privacy Policy.

