It’s understood the man was dismissed after the alleged incident took place at
employee accommodation at the mine site in November 2020



Police in Western Australia have charged a 35-year-old man with two counts of
rape, following allegations a woman working at BHP’s South Flank mine was
sexually assaulted in employee accomodation.



The alleged incident took place at the mine site in the Pilbara in November
2020, police said.



The man, from Vasse, was charged with two counts of sexual penetration without
consent and refused bail to appear at the Perth magistrates court on
Wednesday.



The WA police minister, Paul Papalia, said that women had the right to be safe
“at work and home”. “I encourage any victim of sexual assault to come forward
to police so they can be supported and the matter investigated.”



Guardian Australia understands BHP conducted an investigation after it was
notified of the allegation, which resulted in a dismissal.



BHP would not comment on the specific allegations but said it had a zero
tolerance approach to sexual harassment and assault. About 40% of employees at
South Flank are women.



“Sexual assault or harassment is unacceptable at BHP, full stop,” a BHP
spokesperson said.



“We are absolutely clear on this, and all employees, contractors and those
that come to our sites are made aware of their obligation to support a safe
and respectful workplace.



“Any allegation of sexual assault or harassment is investigated by an
independent central investigations team, and we encourage people to report any
incidents that occur to authorities. If substantiated, disciplinary action is
taken. Central to our response is to support the impacted person or people
including through any investigation, outcomes, reporting and return to work.”



The mining company said it viewed sexual harassment and assault as a
“fundamental health and safety issue”.



It said it had in recent years introduced “mandatory company-wide training
dedicated to respectful behaviours, improvements to facilities such as
lighting, signage and CCTV coverage, increased security presence and stricter
controls on alcohol consumption”.



BHP will limit drinking at its mining camps to four standard drinks a day from
July, but said that policy was introduced in line with Australian health
guidelines not in response to reports of disrespectful behaviour.



People who stay at the camps are able to request a security escort to walk
back to their room at night. That program has been in place for a year, BHP
said, and is part of a broader push to make the camps inclusive and safe.



 _In Australia, support is available at1800-RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit
www.1800RESPECT.org.au._

