SANTIAGO, March 17 (Reuters) - A union representing workers at BHP's (BHP.AX)
sprawling Escondida copper mine in Chile, the world's largest copper mine, on
Thursday threatened a work stoppage over what it claims are breaches in its
collective contract.



Escondida's Union 1 requested an urgent meeting with company executives to
discuss its complaints over promotions, saying many conditions in the contract
were not being upheld by the firm, according to a letter seen by Reuters.



It asked the issues be resolved shortly or it will initiate "labor actions,"
implying a stoppage.



This "may mean, among other measures, the exercise of strikes or collective
abstentions from work, for as long as is agreed," the union said in the
letter. If the union calls for a stoppage, it will let the company know
beforehand so measures can be adopted to "safeguard" company assets.



BHP did not immediately respond to a request for comment.



The union and the company signed the new collective contract last August.



In January, the union accused the firm of being erratic and irresponsible as
COVID-19 infections had risen among the workforce.



Last year, workers at the mine won a historic benefits package at the
bargaining table, which included bonuses distributed to all workers in equal
parts, the union said at the time.  read more



Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



China's Bank of Communications Co Ltd (BoCom) said on Wednesday it would
provide a 100 billion yuan ($13.98 billion) credit line to developer Vanke in
the latest sign of support for the embattled property sector.



Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s
largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every
day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to
professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry
events and directly to consumers.



Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor
expertise, and industry defining technology.



The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding
tax and compliance needs.



The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance
professionals.



Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised
workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.



Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and
insights from worldwide sources and experts.



Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover
hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.



All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of
exchanges and delays.



© 2022 Reuters. All rights reserved

