This article was published more than 6 months ago. Some information may no
longer be current.



Barrick Gold Corp. ABX-T is facing pushback from Indigenous stakeholders in
Alaska who are concerned about the environmental damage the massive Donlin
gold mine could cause if it gets the go ahead.



Toronto-based Barrick, the world’s second biggest gold producer, held its
annual shareholder meeting on Wednesday and two of the three questions asked
by stakeholders revolved around Donlin’s potentially negative impact on the
ecosystem.



Barrick co-owns the Donlin project in southwestern Alaska alongside junior
development company Novagold Resources Inc. Donlin is one of the biggest
undeveloped gold deposits in the world, with estimated annual production of
1.3 million ounces over a 25-year mine life.



Beverly Hoffman, Orutsararmiut Tribal Citizen, said in a statement that there
is significant opposition to the proposed development, owing to concerns that
Donlin will contaminate the Kuskokwim River and decimate the salmon
population, which the locals depend on for subsistence.



“Your company has committed to respect the history, culture and traditional
ways of Indigenous peoples, their standing as distinct self-determining
peoples with collective rights and their interests in land, waters and their
environment. If this is your policy, why are you pushing the development of
the Dunlin open pit mine?” Ms. Hoffman said during the annual meeting. She
also pushed the company to respond in writing.



Mark Bristow, chief executive officer of Barrick, said he would follow up with
a written response to Ms. Hoffman. He also fielded a question from Sophie
Swope, a resident of the city of Bethel, whose residents similarly depend on
the Kuskokwim River.



“This is a very fertile and sponge-like land of tundra, which is one that will
soak up everything we leave behind,“ Ms. Swope said. “Is there any chance we
will be able to continuously subsist on the salmon smelt and river water
without facing any environmental health issues?”



In response, Mr. Bristow said that Barrick is committed to managing the
environmental impact of Donlin: “Have no doubt that you will be able to
continue your traditional activities, including fishing for salmon, once we
make the decision and develop the mine.”



Barrick will continue to engage with Indigenous groups in Alaska, Mr. Bristow
said, adding that a trip is planned in November to meet with local
stakeholders.



The potential development of Donlin is being discussed not long after another
Canadian mining company with plans for a major new mine in Alaska suffered a
serious setback. In 2020, the Donald Trump administration refused to grant
Vancouver-based Northern Dynasty Minerals Ltd. a federal mining permit to
build the Pebble copper gold mine. The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
concluded that its proposed project in the Bristol Bay region of southwestern
Alaska posed too big of a threat to the aquatic ecosystem, including the
sockeye salmon population.



However, unlike Pebble, the Donlin project received federal permits from the
USACE in 2018, making it more likely to go ahead. A bigger potential roadblock
for both Barrick and Novagold in moving forward is the astronomical price tag.
The capital costs of Donlin were last estimated at US$9.1-billion, close to
double those of Pebble. Remoteness, the relatively low-grade nature of gold in
the ground, and a lack of infrastructure are some of the reasons why the costs
are so high. Barrick hasn’t yet decided whether it will build Donlin, and it
is a few years out before even having to make that decision, with extensive
drilling and engineering work still to be carried out.



Barrick already has a major new mine project in its near-term pipeline, which
analysts have said potentially makes it less likely to pull the trigger on
Donlin any time soon. Last month the Toronto miner said it is planning on
reviving the stalled Reko Diq copper gold mine in southwestern Pakistan. That
project has a estimated cost of US$7-billion, with Barrick contributing 50 per
cent and Pakistan the rest.



 _Your time is valuable. Have the Top Business Headlines newsletter
conveniently delivered to your inbox in the morning or evening._ _Sign up
today_ _._



Follow Niall McGee on Twitter: @niallcmcgeeOpens in a new window  



Report an error



Editorial code of conduct



Build your personal news feed

