UN letters express concern about impacts on local population’s health and
environment



Canadian miner Barrick Gold Corp. is once again under fire for its
environmental track record and relationship with local communities in the
Andes Mountains.





On Tuesday, the United Nations released letters that three advisors to its
Human Rights Council — independent experts known as special rapporteurs —
wrote in September to Toronto-based Barrick, the Canadian government and
others, expressing concern about toxic spills from the Veladero mine in
Argentina, which it owns jointly with China’s Shandong Gold Group.





A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk
folder.



The next issue of FP Energy will soon be in your inbox.



We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again





Between 2015 and 2017, mercury and other contaminants were detected in the
river system next to the mine, located at high elevation in northwestern
Argentina, near the border with Chile. The mine, which uses heap leach
processing in which ore is piled on a concrete pad and rinsed with cyanide to
extract gold and silver, was linked to three spills and Barrick paid millions
of dollars in fines.





Afterwards, the spills appeared to stop. But in June the Financial Post
reported that members of nearby communities and local journalists leveled
accusations of new spills of mercury and other heavy metals into local waters,
in 2021 and 2022, citing data collected by scientists at a university in
Mendoza.





The UN special rapporteurs’ letter to Barrick characterized the accusations as
“sufficiently reliable” and expressed concern about the impacts on the local
population’s health and to the environment.





“While we do not wish to prejudge the accuracy of these allegations, we wish
to express our grave concern about the impact on human rights caused by spills
of cyanide, arsenic, mercury and other hazardous substances from the Veladero
mine,” the letter states. “The lack of effective response by your company
exacerbates these impacts.”





It is signed by Marcos Orellana, a UN Special Rapporteur on human rights and
hazardous substances and wastes; Fernanda Hopenhaym, chair-rapporteur of the
Working Group on Human Rights and Transnational Corporations; and David Boyd,
UN special rapporteur on human rights and the environment, who is also a
professor at the University of British Columbia.





Letters were also sent to Shandong Gold, which purchased a 50 per cent stake
in the mine in 2017 for US$960 million, to the Chinese government, and to the
joint venture company, Minera Argentina Gold SRL, that operates the mine.





The UN releases letters 60 days after receipt but Barrick provided the
Financial Post with a copy of its response, which denies nearly all the
allegations.





The company said in its reply that it did not spill any contaminants into the
environment in 2022, and added that the impacts of three historical spills
were overstated because they “did not impact the environment or human rights.”





It added that mercury and other metals found in local waters “naturally occur
in the region,” and noted that cyanide — which it uses to rinse ore — was not
found in the water. The company also said it rejects accusations that it did
not effectively communicate the previous spills to authorities and local
communities.





Still, Saúl Zeballos, who lives in San José de Jáchal, a community of 21,000
about 200 kilometres downstream from the mine, said he blames Barrick for
breaking its promises to protect the local water supply. He added the company
has not met local expectations of providing jobs.





Zeballos said Barrick never alerted the community to the original spill in
2015, which he only heard about informally through connections in the
community. Since then, everyone has been drinking bottled water, but continue
to use the local water for cooking and washing despite concerns about the
health impacts, especially for their children.





They need to leave and leave the area in the same condition as when they got
here



“They need to stop polluting the area,” Zeballos said in an interview during
which his comments were translated from Spanish by two translators provided by
Earthworks and MiningWatch Canada. “They need to leave and leave the area in
the same condition as when they got here.”





Barrick initially developed the Veladero mine in 2005. Within several years,
it started building a second mine several kilometres away, straddling the
Argentina-Chile border, known as Pascua-Lama. But in 2017, Chilean regulators
ordered Barrick to halt all mining after finding adverse impacts on the
environment.





Meanwhile, Argentina has passed legislation that says a mine that commits
three environmental infractions can be forced to close.





The UN advisors’ letter to Barrick cites “information” it received from
unnamed sources summarizing four spills linked to Veladero between 2015 and
2022:





The letter to Barrick does not address whether any regulators or government
officials in Argentina are taking any action at present. It says the impacts
on local communities’ health were a serious concern; it also notes concern
about the impact on the local environment, including the San Guillermo
Biosphere Reserve.





“We are also concerned about the company’s failure to report these spills in a
timely manner,” the letter states. “The lack of timely information hinders the
adoption of protective measures for the populations exposed to toxic
substances in the spills and the environment.”





(ESG) is skewed towards environmental concerns at the expense of social and
governance



Last year, the mine produced 172,000 ounces of gold. In October 2021, Barrick
announced it would create a trust fund for community development projects near
the mine, financed by 1.5 per cent of all gold sales from Veladero.





Last week, on a third quarter earnings call with analysts, Barrick chief
executive Mark Bristow said the company had recently built new pads for its
heap leach operations and alluded to some difficulties.





“We are still getting our heads around the geomet and leach dynamics, which we
believe have also been exacerbated by the abnormally long winter and freezing
of part of the pads,” he said, without offering further details.





Repeating a message he has emphasized previously, Bristow also said on the
call that he believes that ESG — the catch-all term to evaluate a company’s
environmental, social and governance track record — “is skewed towards
environmental concerns at the expense of social and governance.”





They’re completely destroying the water



His company is focused on investing in impoverished regions to help resolve
local poverty, he said.





According to Barrick’s disclosures about payments to foreign governments, in
2021 the company paid US$170,000 in taxes in Argentina. In 2020, the company
paid US$210,000 in taxes and US$12 million for infrastructure improvements in
the country.





Zeballos, the resident of San Jose de Jachal, objected to the idea that
Barrick was making a large economic difference in the community, saying the
company’s environmental legacy would be pollution.





“They’re completely destroying the water,” he said through the translators.  
 __





_• Email:gfriedman@postmedia.com | Twitter: GabeFriedz_











That’s about 13 per cent of all Canadian mortgages



SHARM EL-SHEIKH — A campaign by the South Pacific island nation of Vanuatu for
the world’s top court to take a stance on protecting people from climate
change gained momentum on Friday, winning the support of almost half the
nearly 200 countries at a global summit.



SHARM EL-SHEIKH — A campaign by the South Pacific island nation of Vanuatu for
the world’s top court to take a stance on protecting people from climate
change gained momentum on Friday, winning the support of almost half the
nearly 200 countries at a global summit.



About half of variable-rate, fixed-payment mortgages have hit their trigger
rates, bank estimates



UNITED NATIONS (AP) — The United Nations Security Council voted Thursday to
maintain an arms embargo on Somalia over strong objections from its
government, saying the al-Shabab “terrorist group” still seriously threatens
peace and stability in the region and sanctions are needed to degrade its
activities.



Postmedia is committed to maintaining a lively but civil forum for discussion
and encourage all readers to share their views on our articles. Comments may
take up to an hour for moderation before appearing on the site. We ask you to
keep your comments relevant and respectful. We have enabled email
notifications—you will now receive an email if you receive a reply to your
comment, there is an update to a comment thread you follow or if a user you
follow comments. Visit our Community Guidelines for more information and
details on how to adjust your email settings.



365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4



© 2022 Financial Post, a division of Postmedia Network Inc. All rights
reserved. Unauthorized distribution, transmission or republication strictly
prohibited.



This website uses cookies to personalize your content (including ads), and
allows us to analyze our traffic. Read more about cookies here. By continuing
to use our site, you agree to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy.

