20 YEARS OF



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







Show all languages



20 YEARS OF



Show all languages



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







14 Nov 2022



Share



14 Nov 2022  Author:

    Barrick Gold, 
Author:

    RAID



"Response by Barrick to allegations of security-related violence at North Mara
mine'



... RAID makes the insinuation that Barrick Gold Corporation and/or North Mara
Gold Mine Limited have somehow orchestrated, either under duress or through
fear of repercussions by the Government, the statement by the local leaders
attached to our previous correspondence. Such allegations are entirely false,
inappropriate and deeply disturbing but more importantly are not conducive to
the transparent and good faith engagement we are attempting to establish with
RAID.



I should not have to justify the sequence of events, but based on RAID’s
propensity to misrepresent events, I will set the record straight: on 10 July
2022, we held a meeting with the villages’ leadership as part of our regular
engagement with the communities and at this meeting we requested that they
investigate RAID’s allegations made previously. On Monday 11 July, we received
your letter and shared the letter the following day with the local leadership
to include in their investigations. Why this sequence of events, or the fact
that we have a working relationship with our neighbouring communities for
daily dialogue, would be subject to ‘cause for concern’ again demonstrates how
far-removed RAID seems to be from the community. I reiterate, the local
leaders compiled the statement on their own accord and without influence. We
will not be drawn on RAID’s attempts to discredit the local leaders.





Letters by Barrick Gold responding to allegations of security-related violence
at its North Mara mine



The rising number of killings and assaults at Barrick’s North Mara mine makes
it one of the deadliest industrial mines in Africa in terms of security-
related violence.



20 YEARS OF



Events | Jobs | Media | Data Usage & Cookies | Contact Us



Disclaimer: Business & Human Rights Resource Centre and its collaborative
partners take no position on the diverse views presented in linked material
within the database, nor can we guarantee the factual accuracy of all the
articles and reports we make available. The appearance of such links does not
constitute endorsement of the websites they lead to or the information
contained therein, over which we exercise no editorial control.



 **Business & Human Rights Resource Centre** Registered Charity in England &
Wales no. 1096664, 501(c)(3) non-profit organization in USA and registered
charitable association (e.V.) in Germany (VR 38088 B).

