KINSHASA, Oct 25 (Reuters) - At least one person was killed during protests
against evictions near Barrick Gold Corp's Kibali gold mine in northeast
Democratic Republic of Congo last week, the local governor's office said on
Monday.



Two villages near the mine, where residents had previously been resettled
from, have been occupied by local people in recent months, "in violation of
the rights of the company Kibali goldmines," the Haut Uele governor's office
said in a statement.



"Shots were fired and at least one death and several wounded have been
confirmed," the governor's office said, referring to Friday's confrontation
between settlers and police.



Earlier in the week, authorities had started to demolish houses in the
villages of Bandai and Mege, according to mining transparency group Congo Is
Not For Sale (CNPAV). The governor suspended the evictions following the
deadly protest, his office said, and launched an inquiry.



During the 2012-2013 construction of the mine, Kibali resettled and gave
compensation to around 17,000 people from the area around its concession,
which it refers to as an exclusion zone, according to company records.



Kibali, a joint venture operated by Barrick (ABX.TO), said the demonstration
did not occur on its concession, and was not connected to the company.



"The apparent cause of the demonstration that turned violent was the eviction
by the provincial government of illegal settlers from a government-defined
exclusion zone," a company spokesperson told Reuters by telephone.



The government said it had set up a commission to identify those owed
compensation and those who should be evicted.



Kibali, which is 45%-owned by Barrick, 45% by AngloGold Ashanti Ltd (ANGJ.J)
and 10% by state-owned gold company SOKIMO, produced 364,000 ounces of gold in
2020, according to its website.



Barrick Chief Executive Mark Bristow told Reuters earlier this month that
recent geological discoveries would extend the life of the mine to 2040.  read
more



Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



Veteran Sudanese political and religious leader Al-Sayid Mohamed Othman al-
Mirghani arrived in Khartoum from Egypt on Monday, throwing his clout against
a possible agreement between pro-democracy groups and the military.



Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s
largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every
day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to
professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry
events and directly to consumers.



Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor
expertise, and industry defining technology.



The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding
tax and compliance needs.



The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance
professionals.



Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised
workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.



Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and
insights from worldwide sources and experts.



Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover
hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.



All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of
exchanges and delays.



© 2022 Reuters. All rights reserved

