© First Look Institute



A division of First Look Institute



 _Republicans plan to_ launch a variety of investigations into the U.S.
Chamber of Commerce and many of its largest member corporations if they retake
the majority in the House of Representatives this November. The probes, said a
GOP member of Congress and multiple Republican operatives who requested
anonymity to discuss plans that have yet to be made public, will marry
Republicans’ newly formed hostility to the Chamber with the party’s mission to
undermine the growth of the ESG investment sector.



The power of ESG — which stands for environmental, social, and governance —
criteria to shape company valuations and behavior has become a major source of
consternation among conservatives, who argue that companies that follow it are
breaking with their fiduciary duty to maximize profits for investors.



The Chamber has infuriated Republicans by endorsing ESG criteria. “Today, for
many companies, climate change and carbon emissions impact long-term value,
thereby becoming a factor that retirement fund managers should take into
consideration,” wrote a Chamber vice president in a typical statement in July
2020.



The congressman highlighted what he saw as the downfalls of that approach.
Republicans accuse ESG advocates of using ESG criteria to punish American
energy companies, only to then give an advantage to large, foreign energy
companies over which the U.S. has little oversight anyways.



“How is it again that you can discourage investment in American energy when
you own, or when you’re controlling board seats, of an American energy
company, but you’re pushing it offshore to a Chinese energy company? Tell me
you didn’t violate your fiduciary duty somehow,” said the congressman. “Then
you throw that over into Judiciary [Committee hearings] and say, how do you
reconcile this from an antitrust perspective? How can somebody actually be
duty-of-care to the shareholders of one entity when you’re duty-of-care to the
Chinese Communist Party’s-controlled energy company?”



“There is not going to be much to investigate,” said a Chamber spokesperson.
“The Chamber is at the forefront of fighting the SEC climate, human capital
and similar disclosures and believes fiduciaries must focus on maximizing
return.” House Republicans, though, think the Chamber is having it both ways,
criticizing the Securities and Exchange Commission rule but supporting the
principle. “The U.S. Chamber of Commerce supports climate policy that includes
the disclosure of material information for investors to use,” reads the
Chamber’s comment on the SEC’s proposed rule changes that would increase
disclosure requirements for ESG funds.



The growth of the ESG industry has led to some counterintuitive results, as
companies have learned to game the metrics: Some private prison companies, for
instance, score well on the criteria.



On Thursday, 14 state treasurers issued a joint statement condemning
Republican efforts to combat investor advocacy, which has led multiple states,
including West Virginia, Idaho, Oklahoma, Texas, and Florida, to restrict
state treasurers from doing business with funds that deploy ESG screens.



“Disclosure, transparency, and accountability make companies more resilient by
sharpening how they manage, ensuring that they are appropriately planning for
the future. Our work, alongside those of other investors, employees, and
customers have caused many companies to evolve their business models and their
internal processes, better addressing the long term material risks that
threaten their performance,” the statement reads. “The evolving divide
suggests that there will be two kinds of states moving forward: states focused
on short term gains and states focused on long term beneficial outcomes for
all stakeholders.”



The Chamber announced recently it would devote $3 million toward the election
of Mehmet Oz — who goes by Dr. Oz — in Pennsylvania, and funneled it through
the Senate Leadership Fund. The move was generally seen as an olive branch to
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., who is linked to the super PAC.
They have so far made no similar contribution to the House Republican super
PAC.



 _Today’s GOP war_ on the Chamber of Commerce represents a stunning turnaround
from just a few years ago, when House Republicans and the Chamber were aligned
on just about everything. And it comes in the wake of the collapse of the
National Rifle Association, leaving two of the GOP’s most powerful outside
armies largely disarmed. But as the Republican Party and the Chamber have
polarized to opposite sides of the conservative movement, a deeper
disagreement between the two — dating back to the movement that formed around
Barry Goldwater in the 1950s and ’60s — has been reawakened.



At the height of the New Deal era after World War II, Democrats and liberal
Republicans were united in the belief that cooperation between big business,
big labor, and government was the secret to the era’s economic boom. John
Kenneth Galbraith, the nation’s most famous economist and later President John
F. Kennedy’s adviser, dubbed it “The Affluent Society” in a 1958 book that was
both a cultural and a political sensation.



Arrayed against this coalition was an aggrieved and increasingly well-
organized network of small and medium-sized businesses that felt they were
getting squeezed by the big guys. What was good for General Motors, they said,
was not necessarily good for them.



Big Labor and the New Deal coalition thought that they were living in a time
of peace between capital and labor, but capital always knew that they were
engaged in a strategic ceasefire, having been crushed by the Depression and
unable to compete against the rising strength of the modern government.



But there was no real peace, and big business launched its counterattack on
both labor and government in the 1970s, ushering in the neoliberal era. The
Chamber, this time allied with small and medium-sized businesses, played a
major role in the counterattack, with the heir to the Goldwater movement,
Ronald Reagan, enacting a wish list of big business policies, deregulation,
and tax cuts.



Jamie Galbraith, who followed his father into the economics profession, served
as an aide to the Joint Tax Committee in Congress and recalled the Chamber at
the time as an “ultra supply-side, ultra Reagan revolution organization with
essentially no compromisers. … The Chamber was just down-the-line for the
lowest possible taxes and most complete deregulation and privatization.”



But the Chamber started drifting back to the center in the early part of the
Clinton years, endorsing the administration’s health care proposal known as
“Hillarycare,” for the first lady. “All of a sudden, the Chamber just became
something wholly different than whatever I perceived them to be. And I know we
were very upset about it,” said former Texas Rep. Dick Armey, the No. 3
Republican at the time.



In the wake of the endorsement, recalled one Republican operative, a member of
House Republican leadership asked to meet with the Chamber’s board. Instead of
delivering a standard political speech, he began by asking all the staff to
leave the room. “He just ripped them a new asshole,” said the operative. “How
could you possibly go down this anti-free enterprise, left-wing trail,” the
GOP leader demanded. (The operative recalled it was Armey, but Armey said it
may have been Tom DeLay. I couldn’t track down DeLay in time for this story.)



The dressing down worked. Richard Lesher had run the organization since 1975,
but after Republicans took power in 1995 after the Gingrich Revolution in
1995, Lesher was eased out. “When we took the majority, of course, they came
over, reminding us that we were the best friends we ever had — yakety yak,”
Armey said. “When you come into the majority, you have no shortage of newfound
friends.” The Chamber was a reliable Republican ally for the next roughly 20
years, up until just the last few.



(DeLay later launched what he dubbed the K Street Project, which was an effort
to bring all of Washington’s lobbying industry under Republican authority,
dictating that firms fire Democratic lobbyists or lose access to the GOP.
“That was a boneheaded idea, and you can quote me if you like. I mean, who in
the hell did he think he was, telling people who they can hire and who they
can’t?” said Armey. “I objected to it in a leadership meeting. And my
objections were not well received.”)



The tensions between big and little businesses never fully subsided, and the
same network of smaller businesses that aligned themselves with Goldwater,
forming the more conservative wing of the GOP, organizing behind Donald Trump
in 2016 and beyond. The small and medium-sized businesses, particularly
manufacturers, have also long been opposed to free-trade policies, as they
lack the capacity to offshore their own production and can’t compete with
cheaper products from overseas.



The conservative Republican member of Congress said that he didn’t begin as an
active opponent of the Chamber, but didn’t see them as a natural ally either.
“Frankly, as a business guy, I couldn’t join some of the efforts nationally,
because they were at odds with small companies,” he said. “They were really
pushing for a long time this pro-China trade policy, which was great for
General Motors, but it was bad for everyone in the supply chain. And it was
really gutting domestic manufacturing. And it was the same with NAM” — the
National Association of Manufacturers — “a lot of their members had had an
organization that was working against their interests. And the biggest,
biggest members have certainly benefited from a lot of this stuff. And I think
that’s a big part of why Trump was so well received by the small and medium
business community.”



The Chamber is among the biggest spenders on lobbying activities in the
country, but House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., and leading
Senate Republicans like John Cornyn of Texas regularly take public shots at
them. The Chamber’s top lobbying job, typically one of Washington’s plummest K
Street assignments, sat open for several months until it was filled by two-
term, back-bench former Rep. Evan Jenkins, who, like many Republicans from
West Virginia, began his career as a Democrat. He was most recently a judge in
West Virginia, having left the House to pursue an unsuccessful run for Senate
in 2018.



In 2020, the Chamber endorsed 23 House Democrats in swing districts, a sharp
break from the past practice of endorsing a nearly exclusive slate of
Republicans, with one or two Democrats thrown on the list for a patina of
bipartisan perception. The pivot came after the Chamber had been unsuccessful
in stopping Trump from getting the 2016 GOP nomination — with a top Chamber
lobbyist even endorsing Hillary Clinton and speaking at the Democratic
National Convention. The business group delighted in Trump’s tax cut, largely
written by Chamber ally Speaker Paul Ryan, but once Democrats took control in
2018, the Chamber began hedging its political bets by backing moderate
Democrats.



“The Chamber of Commerce, after what they did in 2020, they basically became
persona non grata in the conservative movement,” said one well-connected
Republican operative. “There was already a split in the conservative movement,
who were never fans of the Chamber, but you had more moderate members and even
those Republicans, particularly the ones in the House, have had enough of the
Chamber.”



“There isn’t a group that has less influence over Republican members of
Congress at this point than the Chamber of Commerce,” the operative, who asked
for anonymity due to their work on political campaigns in which the Chamber
gets involved, added. “That certainly wasn’t the case a few years ago.”



That the Chamber feels at home in the Democratic Party ought to be cause for
concern for the party’s progressive wing, Galbraith said. “The extirpation of
any old line liberalism in the Democratic Party may have opened up space for
them,” he said.



Ryan Grim[email protected]​theintercept.com@ryangrim



By signing up, I agree to receive emails from The Intercept and to the Privacy
Policy and Terms of Use.



Fetching more

