Searching for your content...



In-Language News



Contact Us



888-776-0942  
from 8 AM - 10 PM ET



News provided by



Sep 15, 2022, 14:00 ET



Share this article



 _Kia and Hyundai Purchasers Urged to Contact Schubert Jonckheer & Kolbe to
Discuss Their Legal Rights_



SAN FRANCISCO, Sept. 15, 2022 /PRNewswire/ -- Schubert Jonckheer & Kolbe LLP
today launched an investigation into automakers Kia and Hyundai for
manufacturing vehicles without a "car immobilizer system," an electronic
security device that prevents a car from being started unless the correct key
is present, and allegedly failing to thoroughly disclose the related safety
concerns.



Many Kia car models dating from 2011 to 2021 and Hyundai car models dating
from 2015 to 2021 allegedly were not equipped with a "car immobilizer system."
According to numerous press report and complaints, the lack of this security
device makes these cars easier to steal than most other cars.



In fact, reports suggest that many car thieves can simply break into these
cars using readily downloadable software and USB flash drives and cables.
According to a CNBC report, viral videos on social media service TikTok
depicts young teens stealing and driving Kia and Hyundai vehicles using a USB
cord. This TikTok challenge, which uses the hashtag "Kia Boys," reportedly has
over 33 million views.



As a result, Kia and Hyundai vehicles are being stolen at increasingly higher
rates. In Los Angeles, officials say the viral trend targeting these easy-to-
steal vehicles has resulted in an 85% increase in thefts of Kia and Hyundai
vehicles compared with last year. And according to a September 8, 2022 Wall
Street Journal article, 48% of cars stolen in St. Louis this year were Kias or
Hyundais, compared with 7% of the total in 2021.



Several recent lawsuits have claimed that the lack of a car immobilizer system
in many Kia and Hyundai vehicles is a safety defect that causes car owners
increased repair costs, loss of value, and loss of vehicle use. To date, Kia
and Hyundai have failed to issue a safety defect recall, provide warranty
coverage, or remedy the defect.



In light of these allegations, the Schubert Firm is investigating whether Kia
and Hyundai's failure to disclose their failure to include an immobilizer
devices in certain vehicles is false and misleading in violation of state and
federal laws.



 **If you purchased a Kia, manufactured between 2011 and 2021, or a Hyundai,
manufactured between 2016 and 2021, that uses a traditional steel key ignition
system, pleasecontact us today or visit our website at
https://www.classactionlawyers.com/cartheft. **



Schubert Jonckheer & Kolbe represents shareholders, employees, and consumers
in class actions against corporate defendants, as well as shareholders in
derivative actions against their officers and directors. The firm is based in
San Francisco, and with the help of co-counsel, litigates cases nationwide.



 **Contact  
** Amber L. Schubert  
Schubert Jonckheer & Kolbe LLP  
[email protected]  
Tel: 415-299-8257



SOURCE Schubert Jonckheer & Kolbe LLP



More news releases in similar topics



Cision Distribution 888-776-0942  
from 8 AM - 9 PM ET

