Nestle Healthcare Nutrition, Inc. (Nestle) is facing a class-action lawsuit
over claims that its Boost Glucose Control drinks help diabetic consumers
manage their blood sugar levels. The case, _Owen v. Nestle Healthcare
Nutrition, Inc.,_ was filed in New Jersey District Court. The suit alleges
that Nestle makes druglike claims about the drinks, which have not been tested
or approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and that the products
mislead consumers into believing that the drinks help control blood glucose
levels when in fact Nestle's own study revealed they do not.



Plaintiff Steven Owen's lawsuit involves Nestle's BOOST-brand Glucose Control
over-the-counter drinks with the name "Glucose Control." As described in his
complaint, the products are labeled "Glucose Control" and prominently state in
bold, capitalized font that they "HELP MANAGE BLOOD SUGAR" and/or that they
are "DESIGNED FOR PEOPLE WITH DIABETES."



Plaintiff, a diagnosed diabetic, purchased a 24-pack of BOOST Glucose Control
in or around April 2022 from Amazon for $38.99. He claims that the products
did not "control" his Glucose or "manage his blood sugar" as he expected it
would in light of the product's labeling. "Defendant's prominent and
systematic mislabeling of the Products and its false and deceptive advertising
form a pattern of unlawful and unfair business practices that harms the public
and, if unstopped, could continue to lead to substantial harm," his complaint
states. His proposed class-action suit includes claims for breach of warranty,
breach of implied warranty, unjust enrichment, and violations of New Jersey
consumer protection laws.



In his complaint, Owens specifically maintains that Nestle's Boost products
make unproven health claims. "Critically, Nestle's marketing and labeling are
tantamount to express and/or implied disease claims relating to the prevention
and control of diabetes," the suit alleges. "Such claims made on dietary
supplements are prohibited as a matter of law and further render the claims
misleading and deceptive."



Under 21 C.F.R. § 101.14(a)(1), a health claim is "any claim made on the label
or in labeling of a food, including a dietary supplement, that expressly or by
implication . . . characterizes the relationship of any substance to a disease
or health-related condition." Thus, claims on food labels are governed by
FDA's health claims regulations if they include either express or implied
references to both a substance and a disease. Pursuant to 21 C.F.R. §
101.14(e), health claims may not be made unless such claims are expressly
reviewed and preauthorized by the FDA. A product that makes unauthorized
health claims is considered misbranded pursuant to 21 U.S.C. § 343(r).



In his complaint, Owens contends that consumers could understand Nestle's
representations to mean that they can use the products to effectively control
glucose levels and manage blood sugar. For instance, he alleges that the name
of the Product, "BOOST Glucose Control," is an implicit or express health
claim because it purports to control a health-related condition, namely the
inability to control glucose. He further maintains that Nestle's statement
that the products are "DESIGNED FOR PEOPLE WITH DIABETES" is an implicit or
expressed health claim because it denotes a relationship between the drink and
diabetes.



Owens' complaint further alleges that Nestle's product deceptively represents
that they control and manage glucose. "Representations that the products
control glucose and 'help manage blood sugar' conveys to the consumer that the
products affirmatively do something to control blood sugar: that whatever
one's blood glucose is at the time they take the products, drinking the
products will make it better," the complaint states. "But this is false, as
demonstrated by the clinical study that Nestle discusses on a part of its
website."



According to the complaint, Nestle's own clinical trial found that the
products were associated with a lesser rise in glucose levels as compared to a
standard nutritional drink in people with type 2 diabetes. However, they did
not show that they controlled blood sugar. "Shockingly, the Products do not
control glucose at all, but rather only produce a slightly favorable response
to glucose levels as compared to one other unidentified product," the
complaint states.



Given the rise in lawsuits alleging false advertising and mislabeling, food
and drink manufacturers must be particularly cautious when making statements
that may be construed as "health claims." Such claims are highly regulated by
the FDA and must meet stringent legal requirements. To avoid unintended
liability, we encourage manufacturers to consult with experienced counsel.



 _The content of this article is intended to provide a general guide to the
subject matter. Specialist advice should be sought about your specific
circumstances._



© Mondaq® Ltd 1994 - 2022. All Rights Reserved.



Email



Password



Forgot your password?



Free, unlimited access to more than half a million articles (one-article limit
removed) from the diverse perspectives of 5,000 leading law, accountancy and
advisory firms



Articles tailored to your interests and optional alerts about important
changes



Receive priority invitations to relevant webinars and events



You’ll only need to do it once, and readership information is just for authors
and is never sold to third parties.



We need this to enable us to match you with other users from the same
organisation. It is also part of the information that we share to our content
providers ("Contributors") who contribute Content for free for your use.



Mondaq uses cookies on this website. By using our website you agree to our use
of cookies as set out in our Privacy Policy.

