August 9



Ben Lovejoy



\- Aug. 9th 2022 4:34 am PT



@benlovejoy



 _Update: A federal judge has now approved the settlement – see bottom of
piece for details_



An iCloud class action lawsuit has been settled out of court, with Apple
agreeing to pay a total of $14.8M to US residents subscribing to one of the
paid storage tiers during a specific time period.



The payout was agreed upon after it was alleged that Apple breached the
service terms and conditions by storing user data on non-Apple servers …





_Macworld_ reports.



Apple has agreed to a $14.8 million settlement “for breach of contract
regarding the iCloud Service that Apple provides to its users.” The crux of
the case is that Apple breached the iCloud Terms and Conditions by storing
iCloud user data using third-party servers rather than its own.



The settlement includes anyone who paid for a subscription to iCloud at any
time from September 16, 2015, to January 31, 2016. You don’t need to do
anything to join the class. As long as the email you used to sign up for
iCloud storage during that time is still active you should receive a
notification that you are a class member.



Apple denies any wrong-doing, but it has agreed to pay the sum to avoid a
trial.



A website for the lawsuit explains how payment will be made.



If, at the time the Class Payment is distributed, you are a subscriber to any
kind of monthly paid iCloud plan, and you have a U.S. mailing address
associated with your plan, you will automatically receive the Class Payment to
the Apple account that pays for your current monthly iCloud subscription.



If, at the time the Class Payment is distributed, you are no longer a
subscriber to any kind of monthly paid iCloud plan, or you do not have a U.S.
mailing address associated with your plan, you will receive the Class Payment
by check at the mailing address associated with your account.



You don’t need to take any action at this stage: those eligible for a payout
will receive an email with details.



As always with class action lawsuits, don’t expect the payment to be anything
significant. The lawyers take their cut off the top, and then the balance is
distributed between, typically, millions of people. In this case, the awards
will be pro-rata to your storage tier – in other words, those subscribed to
the 1TB tier will receive more than those on the 50GB or 200GB tiers.



 _Update: Although out-of-court settlements are agreements between the
parties, it is still necessary in many jurisdictions for a judge to approve
the deal as fair._Patently Apple _spotted that this approvalhas now been
granted._



 _Photo:Kaleidico/Unsplash_



_Add 9to5Mac to your Google News feed._ Google News google-news



_FTC: We use income earning auto affiliate links._ More.



Check out 9to5Mac on YouTube for more Apple news:



iCloud is built into every Apple device, so that means your photos, files,
notes, and more — are safe, up to date, and available wherever you are.



@benlovejoy



Ben Lovejoy is a British technology writer and EU Editor for 9to5Mac. He’s
known for his op-eds and diary pieces, exploring his experience of Apple
products over time, for a more rounded review. He also writes fiction, with
two technothriller novels, a couple of SF shorts and a rom-com!



iPhone 15 could feature rounded titanium design



Tesla teases Apple Music integration coming soon



OLED iPad: Here’s everything we know



Hands-on: The best Mac accessories

