Aug 15 (Reuters) - A federal judge in California has signed off on Apple
Inc.'s (AAPL.O) $30.5 million settlement in a nearly decade-old lawsuit
claiming the company shortchanged 15,000 retail workers by not paying them for
time spent in security checks after their shifts.



U.S. District Judge William Alsup in San Francisco approved the settlement in
the 2013 class action on Saturday. The California Supreme Court in 2020 used
the case to rule that state law requires employees to be paid when they go
through mandatory security screenings.



Walmart Inc. and Amazon.com Inc. are also among major U.S. employers to face
similar lawsuits. Amazon and a staffing agency last year agreed to pay $8.7
million to 42,000 warehouse workers to settle one of those cases.



The plaintiffs in Apple's case claimed retail workers often waited several
minutes after clocking out, and sometimes longer, to have their bags checked
before they could leave the stores where they worked.



Apple and lawyers for the plaintiffs did not immediately respond to requests
for comment.



Alsup had dismissed the case in 2015, saying the workers were not under the
company's control during security checks because they were not required to
bring personal items to work that would have to be screened.



A federal appeals court asked the California Supreme Court to decide whether
time spent in post-shift screenings had to be compensated under state law.



The state court in 2020 ruled against Apple, saying it was impractical to
expect employees not to bring personal belongings to work. The federal court
then revived the case and Alsup last year said he planned to grant summary
judgment to the plaintiffs and order a trial on damages.



The case is Frlekin et al v. Apple Inc, U.S. District Court for the Northern
District of California, No. 3:13-cv-03451.



Our Standards: The Thomson Reuters Trust Principles.



Thomson Reuters



Dan Wiessner (@danwiessner) reports on labor and employment and immigration
law, including litigation and policy making. He can be reached at
daniel.wiessner@thomsonreuters.com.



Bob Koneck, Alex Lempiner



Roger Horner



Sara Merken, David Thomas



Gregg Wirth



Reuters, the news and media division of Thomson Reuters, is the world’s
largest multimedia news provider, reaching billions of people worldwide every
day. Reuters provides business, financial, national and international news to
professionals via desktop terminals, the world's media organizations, industry
events and directly to consumers.



Build the strongest argument relying on authoritative content, attorney-editor
expertise, and industry defining technology.



The most comprehensive solution to manage all your complex and ever-expanding
tax and compliance needs.



The industry leader for online information for tax, accounting and finance
professionals.



Access unmatched financial data, news and content in a highly-customised
workflow experience on desktop, web and mobile.



Browse an unrivalled portfolio of real-time and historical market data and
insights from worldwide sources and experts.



Screen for heightened risk individual and entities globally to help uncover
hidden risks in business relationships and human networks.



All quotes delayed a minimum of 15 minutes. See here for a complete list of
exchanges and delays.



© 2022 Reuters. All rights reserved

