Finra arbitrators ordered a division of Citigroup Inc. to pay $725,383 in
compensatory damages to a former broker who was involved in a trading
violation.



A three-person Financial Industry Regulatory Authority Inc. arbitration panel
held Citigroup Global Markets Inc. liable for failing to pay Shlomo Salant
compensation he earned in 2014, according to an Aug. 26 award. That year,
Salant agreed to settle with the Chicago Board of Trade for his role in a
scheme to create false market interest in U.S. Treasury futures.



The Chicago board “found that during the time period of September 2011 through
December 2012, Salant entered orders without the intent to trade and to create
the appearance of an imbalance in buy/sell pressure,” according to a
disclosure on Salant’s BrokerCheck record.



In 2017, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission reached a non-prosecution
deal with Salant and two other traders for their cooperation in the
investigation of the illegal “spoofing.”



Citigroup terminated Salant in 2015. But in an arbitration claim filed in
March 2019, Salant alleged that Citigroup did not pay what it owed him for his
work in 2014.



The Finra arbitrators unanimously ruled that Citigroup must pay Salant
$107,619.50 for cancelled deferred cash and stock benefits, as well as
$617,763.82 for a cash bonus attributable to his employment in 2014, for a
total of $725,383.32 in compensatory damages.



“We’re very pleased with the award,” said Michael Deutsch, a partner at Singer
Deutsch, who represented Salant. “The arbitrators recognized his right to a
bonus as well as the deferred compensation that had been confiscated and
cancelled by Citigroup.”



Salant had requested a minimum $1 million in compensatory damages and $3
million in punitive damages.



Citigroup indicated it might dispute the arbitration ruling.



“We’re disappointed in the award since Mr. Salant admittedly engaged in
spoofing,” Citigroup spokesperson Mark Costiglio said in a statement. “We’re
considering options with respect to it.”



But Deutsch said Salant earned his pay in the year before his departure from
Citigroup.



“This arbitration decision reflects an understanding by the panel that
employees deserve to be paid based on their performance and the value they
bring to their companies,” he said.



Salant was hired in 2015 by Mizuho Securities USA, where he continues to work.



 **[More:Reg BI enters Top 15 of customer claims in Finra arbitration]**





Related Topics: Citigroup Inc.



Learn more about reprints and licensing for this article.



Subscribe for original insights, commentary and analysis of the issues facing
the financial advice community, from the InvestmentNews team.



The new rule frees retirement plan advisers to incorporate risk and return
factors associated with climate change and other ESG investment alternatives.



The Montana Democrat's pushback gives a bipartisan tenor to ESG skepticism
that so far has been voiced loudly by Republicans.



Provisions such as raising the RMD age and expanding workplace retirement
coverage, which have been approved by the House and by Senate committees, must
be rolled into one bill and enacted before year-end.



The state is concerned that fee-for-service financial planners aren't aligning
their charges with work done for clients. Michael Kitces said the guidance
remains biased toward the AUM model.



The regulator has launched an exam sweep of brokerages' communications with
customers about digital assets, while the House Financial Services Committee
plans to hold a hearing on the FTX bankruptcy.



© 2022 InvestmentNews LLC. Use of editorial content without permission is
strictly prohibited | All rights reserved

