MotorBiscuit



Pure Autos



If you recently got a new Toyota RAV4, then it might need to head back to the
dealership for some maintenance. Some 2022 Toyota RAV4 models are under recall
due to having an issue that prevents the front passenger’s airbag from
deploying correctly.



If you own a 2022 Toyota RAV4 model, then you might need to address a
potential problem. According to AutoBlog, over 3,500 units are at risk due to
an airbag malfunction that may prevent it from deploying correctly.



The at-risk models include the Rav4 Hybrid and Prime models equipped with the
eight-way power seat and height adjustment features. The seats could have a
stop on the frame that interferes with the occupant sensing system.



As a result, it may cause the safety system to be unable to detect an
occupant. If the system doesn’t sense an occupant, then the airbag may not
deploy during a collision, increasing the risk of injuries.



The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) shared that it’s
possible that the stopper and frame near the OSC sensor were assembled with
variations that could cause interference leading to the inability of the OSC
sensor to detect loads.



Owners of the 2022 Toyota RAV4 models at risk will be notified via mail
beginning on September 2, 2022. You can visit the NHSTA site here to enter
your 17-digit VIN to see if your RAV4 is affected.



The models will need to return to a Toyota dealership for service, but you
don’t have to return to the same place where you purchased your SUV. While you
can still drive your RAV4 in the meantime, know that the issue prevents the
SUV from meeting federal motor vehicle safety standard 208.



The issue may not occur in every Toyota RAV4 model equipped with the eight-way
power seat, but at least 70 percent of them could be affected. The problem was
discovered by Toyota engineers, and Toyota is currently unaware of any
injuries related to the issue.



If your vehicle needs to be serviced, then Toyota technicians will inspect the
passenger seat as necessary free of charge. Some mechanical components may be
replaced, and the sensors might be recalibrated.



The 2022 Toyota RAV4 is incredibly safe. In fact, it’s an Insurance Institute
of Highway Safety Top Safety Pick. It earned a ‘Good’ score in almost every
single crash simulation, which is the highest score possible.



Plus, the standard Toyota Safety Sense 2.0 Pre-Collison system received a
Superior rating for the ability to detect pedestrians and avoid collisions at
speeds of 12, 25, and 37 mph.



But the seatbelt system takes a little longer than 60 seconds to initiate and
needs a longer duration time.



Also, this is the only recall for the 2022 Toyota RAV4 so far. We wouldn’t let
it impact your confidence in this SUV. The airbag problem is a minor issue
that is easy to correct, and the RAV4 has excellent safety ratings.



 **RELATED:Driven: The Sporty Mazda CX-5 vs. The Practical Toyota RAV4**

