Your guide to a better future



Approximately 84,000 vehicles are part of this recall.



Andrew Krok



Reviews Editor / Cars



Cars are Andrew's jam, as is strawberry. After spending years as a regular ol'
car fanatic, he started working his way through the echelons of the automotive
industry, starting out as social-media director of a small European-focused
garage outside of Chicago. From there, he moved to the editorial side, penning
several written features in Total 911 Magazine before becoming a full-time
auto writer, first for a local Chicago outlet and then for CNET Cars.



While there's nothing quite as satisfying as pulling a console-mounted
mechanical handbrake or pressing down on a floor-mounted one, most modern
vehicles have moved to electronic parking brakes activated via cabin switches.
That frees up a lot of space for interior designers to work with, but it
doesn't make it problem-free.



Toyota and Lexus have issued a recall for approximate 84,000 vehicles. This
recall covers both the 2022 Toyota Tundra pickup and the 2022 Lexus NX250 and
NX350 compact SUVs. At the moment, it's unclear if the recalled vehicles have
sequential VINs or build dates.



The problem stems from the electronic parking brake. According to Toyota's
press release (the official Part 573 Safety Recall Report has yet to be posted
to NHTSA's website), the electronic parking brake may not engage in the
aforementioned vehicles. A parking brake that cannot be set violates federal
regulations on parking brakes, and it could result in a vehicle rolling away,
which increases the risk of a crash.



While Toyota did not mention a reason for the electronic parking brake's
failure to set, it did mention that a remedy is already established. Owners
will have to take their vehicle to their Toyota or Lexus dealership, where
technicians will update the vehicles' skid control software, which will remedy
the issue. As with all official recalls, this fix won't cost a dime. Owners
will be notified via first-class mail by late October.

