Search



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



VIDEO



CASE STUDY



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



REPORT



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ARTICLE



ADVISORY



WHITE PAPER



REPORT



WEBCAST SERIES



ARTICLE



CAPABILITIES



WHITE PAPER



ARTICLE



HR SERVICES



TOOL



SURVEY REPORT



INSIGHTS



WHITE PAPER



INDUSTRY INTERSECTION



ARTICLE



UNEXPECTATIONS



ABOUT US



CORPORTATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY



READY



Profile and Subscriptions



Global Location



Profile Management



Global Locations



Search



On Aug. 4, 2021, a Pennsylvania federal court dismissed a class action lawsuit
against Walmart Stores, Inc. (Walmart) alleging the improper collection of
Pennsylvania sales tax on sales of 5-Hour Energy drinks.1 On behalf of a class
of taxpayers, the taxpayer asserted that Walmart’s collection of sales tax on
dietary supplements violated the Pennsylvania Unfair Trade Practices and
Consumer Protection Law (UTPCPL) and also amounted to conversion, unjust
enrichment and breach of constructive trust under common-law claims. However,
the Court dismissed the case for failure to state a claim upon which relief
can be granted, finding that a retailer’s incorrect collection of sales tax is
not conduct covered by the UTPCPL, and that the taxpayer could seek a sales
tax refund through a state administrative process.  











On two separate occasions in late 2019 and early 2020, taxpayer Christopher
Lisowski purchased 5-Hour Energy drinks from a Walmart store in Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania. During both transactions, Walmart charged the taxpayer sales tax
at a rate of 7%.2 The taxpayer argued that sales of 5-Hour Energy drinks are
exempt from Pennsylvania sales and use tax because the drink is marketed as a
dietary supplement. The taxpayer cited to Pennsylvania Department of Revenue
(Department) guidance confirming that dietary supplements and substitutes, in
any form, are exempt from sales tax.3 Walmart nonetheless charged sales tax on
sales of the drinks, forming the basis of the taxpayer’s federal class action
lawsuit.  
  
Before the Court, Walmart filed a motion to dismiss the lawsuit for failure to
state a claim upon which relief can be granted.4 In federal court, a motion to
dismiss for failure to state a claim is a defense available under the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.5 While the defense does not resolve the underlying
questions of law, the court must determine whether the plaintiff has “plead a
plausible claim for relief.”6  











In his complaint, the taxpayer first argued that the UTPCPL protects consumers
from the allegedly improper collection of Pennsylvania sales and use tax.
Specifically, the taxpayer alleged that Walmart’s conduct violated the
provision of the consumer protection law prohibiting unfair or deceptive
activity “in the conduct of any trade or commerce.”7 In response, Walmart
argued that the UTPCPL does not cover sales and use taxes because collection
of sales and use taxes is not act in the conduct of “trade or commerce”
regulated by the UTPCPL.  
  
For purposes of the motion to dismiss, the court assumed that sales of 5-Hour
Energy drinks are not taxable and that Walmart incorrectly collected sales
tax.8 The UTPCPL protects consumers from unfair and deceptive practices in
“trade or commerce,” defined as the advertising, sale or distribution of
services or products.9 Although there was no question that Walmart engages in
“trade or commerce,” the Court ultimately determined that Walmart’s collection
of sales tax was not an act in the conduct of such commercial activity.
Acknowledging that Pennsylvania courts have not directly addressed the
UTPCPL’s “trade or commerce” limitation in the context of a case alleging
improper collection of sales tax, the Court considered a recent federal court
decision applying Pennsylvania law. In that case, the court ruled that the
collection of sales tax did not qualify as “trade or commerce” under the
UTPCPL.10 The court reasoned that retailers collect sales tax because they are
required to do so by law and they receive no benefit or profit from collecting
such taxes.  
  
The Court also cited approvingly to several state court decisions which
determined that similar state consumer protection laws – all based on the
Federal Trade Commission Act – do not cover the collection of sales and use
taxes.11 The Court found these decisions to be persuasive and consistent with
the language of the UTPCPL. Based on these decisions, the Court concluded that
the UTPCPL did not regulate activity disconnected from Walmart’s commercial
interests, including tax collection.  
  
The Court likewise rejected the taxpayer’s arguments that the Pennsylvania
Fair Credit Extension Uniformity Act (FCEUA) allows enforcement under the
UTPCPL, and that Walmart profited from the collection of sales and use taxes.
The Court concluded that the FCEUA included no language indicating that the
collection of sales taxes is actionable under the UTPCPL. Additionally, the
Court concluded that any tax credits received by Walmart in collecting sales
tax was in its capacity as a retailer collecting taxes for the state and was
“motivated by a public duty rather than private gain.”12 For these reasons,
the Court dismissed the taxpayer’s UTPCPL claim.











The taxpayer’s other claims were based in common law, a system of judicially
created laws based on fairness principles. Here, the taxpayer alleged the
common-law claims of conversion, unjust enrichment, and breach of constructive
trust. In response, Walmart contended that a statutory remedy was available to
the taxpayer under Pennsylvania law, thus barring his common-law claims.  
  
The Court agreed that the taxpayer’s common-law claims were barred because
Pennsylvania law provides an adequate remedy in the form of requesting a
refund of improperly collected sales tax from the Department. Pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Statutory Construction Act, where Pennsylvania law provides a
statutory remedy, all common-law claims are barred.13  
  
After determining that Pennsylvania’s statutory-remedy rule is substantive law
that may be applied in federal court, the Court considered the issue of
whether Pennsylvania law provides an exclusive and adequate remedy to the
taxpayer. Under Pennsylvania’s law, taxpayers may petition the Department for
a refund of overpaid tax to which the Commonwealth is not entitled.14 First,
the Court found that the relevant statutory provisions established a “clear
procedure” for taxpayers to obtain refunds of improperly collected sales tax.
Next, the Court concluded that the available remedy was “exclusive” and
“adequate” as supported by Pennsylvania case law.15 Accordingly, the Court
concluded that the taxpayer was not permitted to any common-law relief and
dismissed the remaining claims.  











The dismissal of the _Lisowski_ case is representative of a growing trend by
federal courts to dismiss sales tax cases or deny injunctive relief where an
alternative remedy is available to the taxpayer at the state level.16 In
granting Walmart’s motion to dismiss, the court foreclosed any future
possibility of a class action lawsuit in federal court.17 Reasoning that
retailers collect sales tax as agents of the Commonwealth, the Court also
refused to expand the scope of Pennsylvania’s consumer protection law to
include sales tax collection. Ultimately, the Court’s decision is
representative of the high bar that exists for sales tax cases to proceed in
federal court, a forum that many consider to be more taxpayer-friendly with
respect to state tax matters than state administrative tribunals or state
courts.  
  
Without an option to pursue their claims in federal court, impacted taxpayers
are limited to filing refund petitions individually with the Department, which
carries its own restrictions and drawbacks. Pennsylvania’s administrative
petition process does not allow class actions and taxpayers must file refund
petitions within a three-year period from the date which the tax was paid.18
Allowing taxpayers to sue under the UTPCPL or under common-law causes of
action may have exposed Walmart and similar retailers to potentially large
damage amounts if the taxpayers were ultimately successful on the merits of
the lawsuit. From the taxpayer’s perspective, a federal court class action
lawsuit would have been a more procedurally efficient process for seeking
relief given the larger aggregate tax dollars at stake.  
  
For smaller appeals where a relatively minor amount of sales tax is at issue,
the costs of filing a refund petition would greatly exceed the amount of the
potential refund sought on an individual basis. In theory, retailers may
systematically charge sales tax on certain allegedly non-taxable products,
which may not be revealed or addressed until a state audit, because individual
taxpayers would lack the incentive to pursue such refunds. Likewise, states
including Pennsylvania are not motivated to provide credits to vendors for
over-collected sales tax under audit based on revenue collection
considerations. From a consumer protection perspective, the practical issues
presented in the _Lisowski_ case may provide potential reasons for adjusting
the administrative tax appeals process to allow for class action lawsuits and
other reforms in order to facilitate greater retailer accountability without
unduly burdening retailers.







1 _Lisowski v. Walmart Stores_ , No. 2:20-cv-1729-NR, U.S. District Court for
the Western District of Pennsylvania, Aug. 4, 2021.  
2 The 7% sales tax rate consists of a 6% state rate plus an additional 1%
local rate levied by Allegheny County.  
3 See Form REV-717, _Retailers’ Information Guide_ , Pennsylvania Department
of Revenue, Feb. 2021; 72 PA. STAT. § 7204(29).  
4 Walmart also argued that the taxpayer’s claims are barred by the voluntary-
payment doctrine and because the taxpayer failed to allege deceptive conduct
or justifiable reliance to support a UTPCPL claim, but the court did not
consider these arguments since it dismissed the lawsuit on other grounds.  
5 FED. R. CIV. P. 12(b)(6).  
6 Citing _Kehr Packages, Inc. v. Fidelcor, Inc_., 926 F.2d 1406, 1409 (3d Cir.
1991).  
7 73 PA. STAT. § 201-3(a).  
8 The Court did not address the question of whether sales of 5-Hour Energy
drinks were in fact taxable under Pennsylvania law.  
9 73 PA. STAT. § 201-2(3).  
10 _McLean v. Big Lots Inc._ , No. 20-2000, 2021 WL 2317417 (W.D. Pa. June 7,
2021).  
11 Citing _Feeney v. Dell, Inc._ , 908 N.E.2d 753, 770 (Mass. 2009); _Blass v.
Rite Aid of Connecticut, Inc._ , 16 A.3d 855, 863 (Conn. Super. Ct. 2009),
_aff’d_ , 16 A.3d 737 (Conn. App. 2011).  
12 Prior to August 1, 2016, retailers received a tax credit equal to 1% of all
sales tax collected from each consumer under Pennsylvania law. In August 2016,
the law was changed to provide retailers with a flat $25-per-month tax credit,
regardless of the amount of tax collected. 72 PA. STAT. § 7227.  
13 1 PA. CONS. STAT. § 1504.  
14 72 PA. STAT. §§ 7252; 10003.1(a).  
15 _Lilian v. Commonwealth_ , 354 A.2d 250 (Pa. 1976).  
16 For example, another Pennsylvania federal court dismissed a sales tax
lawsuit by the Online Merchants Guild against the Department seeking
declaratory and injunctive relief over the Department’s sales tax registration
demands of remote sellers. _Online Merchants Guild v. Hassell_ , No.
1:21-CV-369, U.S. District Court for the Middle District of Pennsylvania,
dismissed May 28, 2021. Earlier this year, an Illinois federal court refused
to grant a temporary restraining order against California for pursuing back
sales taxes from a Chicago-based online merchant, citing that the federal Tax
Injunction Act constrains the court from enjoining a tax when a remedy is
available in state court. _Rubinas v. Maduros_ , No. 21-CV-96, U.S. District
Court for the Northern District of Illinois, motion denied Jan. 18, 2021.  
17 The taxpayer’s lawsuit was dismissed with prejudice, meaning that the
taxpayer may not address the issues with its complaint or re-file the
complaint. A dismissal with prejudice is typically reserved for a lawsuit in
which the court determines there are no judiciable questions to resolve.  
18 It should be noted that Pennsylvania provides retailers the first right to
file refund claims for over-reported sales tax, but that right may be assigned
to the customer. This provides a so-called “group refund” procedure whereby
the retailer returns the over-collected sales tax to the applicable customers
if successful on the refund claim. However, customers are forced to pursue
sales tax refunds individually where retailers decline to do so and assign
their rights to the customer.





Share with your network



Share



Submit RFP



RFP



Partner and National SALT Practice Indirect Tax Services Leader  



Matthew Melinson is a partner in Grant Thornton's Philadelphia office and the
national leader of the SALT practice's indirect tax services. Melinson is
responsible for all aspects of multistate tax consulting and planning and
compliance related to income tax, franchise tax, sales and use tax, credits
and incentives, real estate tax, and personal property tax.



Philadelphia, Pennsylvania



Managing Director, State and Local Tax Services  



Jerry Glynn is a State and Local Tax practice managing director. Prior to
joining Grant Thornton, Glynn was a director of LECG/SMART’s tax practice with
more than 24 years of state and local income, franchise and sales/use tax
experience.



Philadelphia, Pennsylvania



Senior Manager, Tax  



Philadelphia, Pennsylvania



Philadelphia  



Principal, SALT Services  
National Tax Office Leader



Jamie Yesnowitz, principal serving as the State and Local Tax (SALT) leader
within Grant Thornton's Washington National Tax Office, is a national
technical resource for Grant Thornton's SALT practice. He has 22 years of
broad-based SALT consulting experience at the national and practice office
levels in large public accounting firms.



Washington DC, Washington DC



Director, Tax  



Chicago, Illinois



Director, Tax  



Cincinnati, Ohio



This content supports Grant Thornton LLP’s marketing of professional services
and is not written tax advice directed at the particular facts and
circumstances of any person. If you are interested in the topics presented
herein, we encourage you to contact us or an independent tax professional to
discuss their potential application to your particular situation. Nothing
herein shall be construed as imposing a limitation on any person from
disclosing the tax treatment or tax structure of any matter addressed herein.
To the extent this content may be considered to contain written tax advice,
any written advice contained in, forwarded with or attached to this content is
not intended by Grant Thornton LLP to be used, and cannot be used, by any
person for the purpose of avoiding penalties that may be imposed under the
Internal Revenue Code.  
  
The information contained herein is general in nature and is based on
authorities that are subject to change. It is not, and should not be construed
as, accounting, legal or tax advice provided by Grant Thornton LLP to the
reader. This material may not be applicable to, or suitable for, the reader’s
specific circumstances or needs and may require consideration of tax and
nontax factors not described herein. Contact Grant Thornton LLP or other tax
professionals prior to taking any action based upon this information. Changes
in tax laws or other factors could affect, on a prospective or retroactive
basis, the information contained herein; Grant Thornton LLP assumes no
obligation to inform the reader of any such changes. All references to
“Section,” “Sec.,” or “§” refer to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended.



No Results Found. Please search again using different keywords and/or filters.



© 2022 Grant Thornton LLP - “Grant Thornton” refers to the brand under which
the Grant Thornton member firms provide assurance, tax and advisory services
to their clients and/or refers to one or more member firms, as the context
requires. GTIL refers to Grant Thornton International Ltd (GTIL). Grant
Thornton LLP is a member firm of GTIL. GTIL and each member firm of GTIL is a
separate legal entity. GTIL is a nonpracticing umbrella entity organized as a
private company limited by guarantee incorporated in England and Wales. GTIL
does not deliver services in its own name or at all.

