New Orleans police are investigating a fatal shooting at the Walmart on Chef
Menteur Highway.



New Orleans police are investigating a fatal shooting at the Walmart on Chef
Menteur Highway.



A Walmart employee was killed and another person was injured in a shooting
inside the retail chain's Gentilly store around 6:30 p.m. Monday, according to
New Orleans police.



The victim, an employee of the store at 4301 Chef Menteur Highway, was
pronounced dead at the scene after suffering a gunshot wound to the chest. The
body remained inside the store until a Coroner's Office van arrived around 8
p.m.



The second person, a woman, was shot in the foot but was said to be in stable
condition Monday night.



Shopper D. Martin was near the jewelry section of the store when she heard a
couple of shots ring out. She thought it might be someone setting off
fireworks, but Martin said she ran for cover toward the store's toy aisles
just to be safe.



"Me and six other people ran to hide in the toy section," she said. She
eventually saw the employee's body lying on the floor near the checkout lanes.



An officer, who was at the front of the store working a paid detail, quickly
called out for assistance, and the male suspect was arrested at the scene.



During a press conference, New Orleans Police Superintendent Shaun Ferguson
said authorities are still in the early stages of the investigation and are
unsure why the suspect shot and killed the Walmart employee.



"This is a very brazen incident in which an individual walked into a business
this time of the evening with hundreds of customers inside of this business,
armed with a weapon and willing to cause someone harm," Ferguson said.



An employee was fatally shot and a second person was injured at a Gentilly
Walmart on Monday night, NOPD said.



http://www.nola.com



NOPD: A man was shot and killed at the Walmart off Chef Menteur Hwy. Someone
was apprehended at the scene. pic.twitter.com/cblbJYqknP



It was chaos in the seconds following the shooting, according to a Walmart
employee who was working cart duty in the parking lot at the time. He didn't
hear the shots but said patrons poured out of the store into the parking lot,
most of them running "like a bat out of hell."



"People started going crazy," he said.



Constance Horn made it out of the checkout line with a few bags of groceries
just seconds before the shooting began. She was visibly shaken but feeling
lucky she made it outside to catch a bus home.



“It had me nervous,” Horn said. “You hear about this happening, but when you
experience this, it’s an entirely different thing.”



Walmart later issued a statement about the death of their employee.



“The loss of our associate is deeply saddening and our hearts go out to their
loved ones," it said. "We are grateful for the swift actions of law
enforcement and will do everything we can to support our associates in the
wake of this tragedy. We will continue to assist law enforcement during their
investigation.”



The killing was the second of the day in New Orleans.



The body of a slaying victim was found inside a burned car near the Industrial
Canal levee in the Lower 9th Ward late Monday morning, accordin…



It also was at least the seventh reported in the first six days of the year in
what has been a much bloodier start to the year than in 2019. Last year, New
Orleans didn't register its first murder until Jan. 7 and didn't record seven
until Jan. 27.





Stay with NOLA.com for more updates.



Three separate shootings were reported within about 90 minutes late Saturday
and into early Sunday, injuring three people, according to New Or…



 _Contact Katelyn Umholtz atkumholtz@theadvocate.com._



The number of homicides in unincorporated Jefferson Parish doubled in 2019, a
statistic officials called an anomaly that came on the heels of …



{{description}}



Email notifications are only sent once a day, and only if there are new
matching items.



News Tips:  
newstips@theadvocate.com



Other questions:  
subscriberservices@theadvocate.com



Need help?

