Jonathan Franklin



A sign is posted in front of a Walmart store in American Canyon, Calif. The
state has filed a lawsuit against Walmart for allegedly disposing of hazardous
waste, state officials announced. **Justin Sullivan/Getty Images** ****hide
caption****



A sign is posted in front of a Walmart store in American Canyon, Calif. The
state has filed a lawsuit against Walmart for allegedly disposing of hazardous
waste, state officials announced.



California officials have filed a statewide lawsuit against Walmart alleging
that the company illegally disposed of hazardous waste at landfills across the
state.



In the 42-page document filed Monday by state prosecutors, the lawsuit alleges
the retail giant illegally dumped nearly 160,000 pounds of hazardous waste, or
more than 1 million items, each year in California over the last six years.



California Attorney General Rob Bonta and 12 California district attorneys
said Walmart violated California's environmental laws and regulations by
dumping hazardous waste products at landfills that aren't equipped to handle
the materials, including alkaline and lithium batteries, insect killer sprays,
aerosol cans, toxic cleaning supplies and LED lightbulbs.



The lawsuit also claims Walmart dumped "confidential customer information" at
these landfills.



"Walmart's own audits found that the company is dumping hazardous waste at
local landfills at a rate of more than one million items each year. From
there, these products may seep into the state's drinking water as toxic
pollutants or into the air as dangerous gases," Bonta said in a statement.



Bonta said the lawsuit filed against the retail giant should serve as a
warning to the state's "worst offenders."



In an emailed statement to NPR, Walmart said the company will defend itself
and said the lawsuit is "unjustified."



"We have met with the state numerous times and walked them through our
industry-leading hazardous waste compliance programs in an effort to avoid
litigation. Instead, they filed this unjustified lawsuit," Walmart
spokesperson Randy Hargrove said. "The state is demanding a level of
compliance regarding waste disposal from our stores of common household
products and other items that goes beyond what is required by law."



The latest lawsuit filed against Walmart isn't the company's first with the
state of California.



In 2010, the California Attorney General's Office reached a $25 million
settlement against the retail giant for illegally disposing of hazardous
waste. But according to the attorney general's office, a 2015 inspection found
that Walmart continued to dump waste illegally.



"Walmart is a responsible corporate citizen in California and everywhere we
operate. We take our obligation to protect the environment seriously and have
industry-leading processes in place to comply with local, state and federal
environmental laws," Hargrove said.



Since 2015, California investigators said 58 inspections of trash compactors
taken from Walmart stores found dozens of items classified as either hazardous
waste, medical waste or customer records with personal information.



Sponsor Message



Become an NPR sponsor

