20 YEARS OF



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







Show all languages



20 YEARS OF



Show all languages



Explore the big challenges, opportunities, debates and frameworks for business
and human rights. This section contains a selection of key portals curated by
our global team.







Alongside its core work providing a platform for Human Rights advocates, the
Resource Centre runs several focused programme areas and regularly releases
briefings and reports on areas of particular interest.







Opinion pieces, interviews and blogs from across the business and human rights
movement.







Find out more about our impact, who we are and how we are funded.







1 Jan 2001



Share



1 Jan 2001  Author:

    Business & Human Rights Resource Centre



Status:  ONGOING



**Sex discrimination cited at Wal-Mart / Women accuse Wal-Mart / Lawyers seek
OK for class-action suit, by Bob Egelko, Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Dukes et al.
- Opinion of the Court, Wal-Mart Female Employees Try Again for Sex-Bias Class
Action, by Jordyn Holman **



In 2001, six female employees of Walmart filed suit against their company in
US federal court alleging that Walmart discriminated against them in salary,
bonuses and training. After extensive discovery and oral argument, in 2003 the
plaintiffs filed an amended complaint requesting that the court certify the
case as a class action on behalf of current and former female Walmart
employees maintaining that the discrimination faced by the original plaintiffs
was systematic in nature and affected all women employed by Walmart. In June
of 2004, the court granted the plaintiffs’ motion for class certification. The
lawsuit represents approximately 1.5 million current and former female Walmart
employees, which makes it the largest workplace bias case in US history.
Walmart appealed the class certification decision.



In February of 2007, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the lower
court's ruling granting class action status to this gender discrimination
lawsuit. In February 2009, the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals granted
Walmart's request for an en banc review of the lower court's ruling granting
class action status. This review was heard in late March 2009. In April 2010,
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that this lawsuit could move forward
to trial as a class action lawsuit. Walmart petitioned the Supreme Court in
August 2010 asking it to hear an appeal of the Ninth Circuit Court's ruling
allowing this lawsuit to proceed as a class action. The company maintains that
the claims should be handled individually (or in smaller groups) rather than
as a class of more than one million women. In December 2010 the Supreme Court
announced that it would hear Walmart's appeal in this case. The Court heard
oral arguments in late March 2011. The Court issued its ruling on 20 June 2011
reversing the court of appeals ruling allowing the case profile as a class
action. On 27 October 2011, the plaintiffs re-filed their complaint with the
federal court in San Francisco, claiming gender bias on behalf of workers in
California. On 16 January 2012, the defendants filed a motion to dismiss the
suit, claiming the smaller proposed class action seeks to cover all women who
were employed at any Walmart in any region that included a California store.
This motion to dismiss was rejected by the court of appeals in September 2012.
In August 2013, however, the district court issued an order denying the women
class certification. If the women want to pursue the claims against Walmart,
they will have to each pursue their respective claims individually.



In June 2012, nearly 2,000 female Walmart employees filed discrimination
charges against the company with the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission. In August 2013, the US federal court issued an order denying the
women class certification. If the women want to pursue the claims against
Walmart, each will have to pursue her claims individually.



In November 2017, seven women who were part of the 2001 suit filed a new
lawsuit in Florida Southern District Court alleging gender discrimination in
compensation and promotion against Walmart and Sam’s Club female employees in
three regions in the southeastern USA. The plaintiffs are asking for
compensation including back pay and damages for lost compensation and job
benefits. Walmart once again declared that these claims were not suited to
qualify as class action.





The case is ongoing.



20 YEARS OF



Events | Jobs | Media | Data Usage & Cookies | Contact Us



Disclaimer: Business & Human Rights Resource Centre and its collaborative
partners take no position on the diverse views presented in linked material
within the database, nor can we guarantee the factual accuracy of all the
articles and reports we make available. The appearance of such links does not
constitute endorsement of the websites they lead to or the information
contained therein, over which we exercise no editorial control.



 **Business & Human Rights Resource Centre** Registered Charity in England &
Wales no. 1096664, 501(c)(3) non-profit organization in USA and registered
charitable association (e.V.) in Germany (VR 38088 B).

