



On August 23, an Illinois federal judge dismissed a putative class action
lawsuit against Walmart over its fudge mint cookies. The plaintiff Eugene
DeMaso claimed that the product label was misleading because the cookies did
not contain fudge made from dairy fats or actual mint leaves. However, U.S.
District Judge Charles R. Norgle held that the label was not misleading
because no consumer expects the fudge to be made with dairy fats, or that the
mint refers to anything other than a flavor.



DeMaso had alleged that fudge must contain dairy ingredients as its source of
fat, but that the Walmart cookies contain only vegetable oils. DeMaso’s
allegation was largely based on his own definition of fudge. However, the
definition of “fudge” was not at issue but what a reasonable consumer expects
fudge to mean. Judge Norgle held that DeMaso did not plausibly allege that
reasonable consumers would expect fudge to contain fat from dairy ingredients
rather than vegetable fats.



DeMaso also argued that the declaration of the word “mint,” pictures of mint
leaves, and green packaging led consumers to believe the cookies contained
mint as an ingredient. However, Walmart suggested that absent words such as
“made with mint,” a reasonable consumer would only conclude that the cookies
tasted like mint. Agreeing with Walmart, the court found that mint is most
commonly associated with flavor, and that reasonable consumers would read the
mint representation as a flavor and it would be unreasonable and fanciful to
conclude otherwise.



DeMaso sought to pursue his claims on behalf of a class of Illinois consumers,
as well as consumers in 25 other states. The case was dismissed with
prejudice.



About this Author



Keller and Heckman offers global food and drug services to its clients. Our
comprehensive and extensive food and drug practice is one of the largest in
the world. We promote, protect, and defend products made by the spectrum of
industries regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the
European Commission and Member States authorities in the European Union (EU)
and similar authorities throughout the world. The products we help get to
market include foods, pharmaceuticals, medical devices, veterinary products,
dietary supplements, and cosmetics. In addition...





![As a woman owned company, The National Law Review is a certified member of
the Women's Business Enterprise National
Council](/sites/all/themes/nationallaw/WBE_Seal_RGB.png)



You are responsible for reading, understanding and agreeing to the National
Law Review's (NLR’s) and the National Law Forum LLC's Terms of Use and Privacy
Policy before using the National Law Review website. The National Law Review
is a free to use, no-log in database of legal and business articles. The
content and links on www.NatLawReview.com are intended for general information
purposes only. Any legal analysis, legislative updates or other content and
links should not be construed as legal or professional advice or a substitute
for such advice. No attorney-client or confidential relationship is formed by
the transmission of information between you and the National Law Review
website or any of the law firms, attorneys or other professionals or
organizations who include content on the National Law Review website. If you
require legal or professional advice, kindly contact an attorney or other
suitable professional advisor.



Some states have laws and ethical rules regarding solicitation and
advertisement practices by attorneys and/or other professionals. The National
Law Review is not a law firm nor is www.NatLawReview.com intended to be a
referral service for attorneys and/or other professionals. The NLR does not
wish, nor does it intend, to solicit the business of anyone or to refer anyone
to an attorney or other professional. NLR does not answer legal questions nor
will we refer you to an attorney or other professional if you request such
information from us.



Under certain state laws the following statements may be required on this
website and we have included them in order to be in full compliance with these
rules. The choice of a lawyer or other professional is an important decision
and should not be based solely upon advertisements. Attorney Advertising
Notice: Prior results do not guarantee a similar outcome. Statement in
compliance with Texas Rules of Professional Conduct. Unless otherwise noted,
attorneys are not certified by the Texas Board of Legal Specialization, nor
can NLR attest to the accuracy of any notation of Legal Specialization or
other Professional Credentials.



The National Law Review - National Law Forum LLC 3 Grant Square #141 Hinsdale,
IL 60521 Telephone (708) 357-3317 or toll free (877) 357-3317. If you would
ike to contact us via email please click here.

