There were two mass shootings this weekend, one with a double-digit death
total.



Another mass shooting took place in America -- this time, at a Walmart in
Texas -- that changed the infamous rankings of the deadliest mass shootings in
the nation's modern history.



On Saturday morning, 20 people were killed and 26 others were injured as a
result of a shooting at an El Paso store.



That tally makes it the deadliest shooting in the U.S. since the shooting at a
high school in Parkland, Florida, a year and a half ago.



The list of the deadliest mass shootings spans 53 years and seven states. The
shooting at the El Paso Walmart marks the fourth shooting of the deadliest 12
across America that took place in Texas.



Six of the 12 deadliest shootings in the country have taken place in the past
five years, as the shootings at the Las Vegas music festival, Pulse nightclub,
Sutherland Springs church, Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, the San
Bernardino regional center, and now the Walmart in El Paso, have all occurred
since 2015.



Four of the five worst gun massacres on the list -- including the deadliest,
at a concert in Las Vegas -- occurred in the past two years.



The country "has experienced an increase in mass casualty attacks" wrought by
mentally troubled individuals "who commit mass murder in furtherance of some
perceived grievance or ideological cause," John Cohen, a former
counterterrorism coordinator for the Department of Homeland Security and a
consultant for ABC News, said after the massacre in Las Vegas, in which 58
people were killed.



ABC News has compiled a list of the 12 deadliest mass shootings, which
includes some incidents that had the same death tolls. Any suspects who were
killed in the incidents are not included in the death tolls.



Stephen Paddock, from Mesquite, Nevada, was identified by authorities as the
shooter holed up in a Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino hotel suite, packing as
many as 19 guns. Around 10 p.m. he opened fire on thousands of country music
concert attendees across the street below, killing 58 people; more than 500
others were injured.



Around 2 a.m. Omar Mateen, a 29-year-old former security guard, opened fire
and killed 49 people who were in an Orlando gay nightclub called Pulse. During
the rampage, Mateen, a U.S. citizen, was killed by responding police in a
shootout. His ISIS-inspired hate crime injured more than 50 other people. Law
enforcement sources told ABC News that Omar Mateen's wife, Noor Mateen, had
tried to dissuade him from committing the act. She was charged with aiding and
abetting him, as well as committing obstruction. Noor Mateen has pleaded not
guilty.



Virginia Tech senior Seung-hui Cho, 23, purchased a 9-mm Glock handgun on
March 13, 2007, and a .22-caliber gun within a week before he started shooting
people at the Blacksburg campus, including five professors and 26 fellow
students. The South Korean–born Cho began his rampage in a dorm room, where
two students were shot and killed. According to police, he rearmed at his dorm
room and left a note before going out and killing 30 more people in four
classrooms, He then turned a gun on himself.



Adam Lanza was 20 years old when he entered Sandy Hook Elementary School
wearing a bulletproof vest and armed with a semiautomatic rifle and two
semiautomatic handguns — a Glock and a Sig Sauer. He breached the school by
shooting out a window pane of the front office, then gunned down and killed 26
people, including 20 first-graders and six adult school staff members. Not
included in the death count is Lanza's mother, Nancy Lanza, who police say was
slain before he arrived at the school, as well as Adam Lanza, who took his own
life at the school.



At least 26 people were killed and 20 others were injured when a shooter
opened fire at the First Baptist Church of Sutherland Springs. Further details
of the shooting in the rural community, about 30 miles southeast of San
Antonio, were not immediately clear.



After slamming his Ford Ranger truck into the window of Luby's Cafeteria,
35-year-old George Jo Hennard said, according to The Killeen Daily Herald,
"This is what the women of Bell County made me do." He then started firing his
guns and murdered 23 people and left 20 more wounded. Ten of Hennard's victims
were killed by single shots to the head. Once police responded, Hennard
retreated to a restroom, where he killed himself.



The suspect was identified by authorities as Patrick Crusius, 21, of Allen,
Texas, and he was "taken into custody without incident" and without any law
enforcement officers firing their weapons, according to El Paso Police
Department Sgt. Robert Gomez. He later told investigators he wanted to shoot
as many Mexicans as possible, two law enforcement officials told ABC News.



The wounded ranged in age from a 2-year-old to an 82-year-old victim.



The officials also said an assault-style rifle, similar to an AK-47, was
secured at the scene along with several magazines.



At a news conference on Saturday night, El Paso police chief Greg Allen said
that 20 people had died and 26 more had been injured. Allen said authorities
are examining what he called a "manifesto" they believe was written by the
shooter and shows a possible "nexus" to a hate crime. Two people who had
suffered injuries later succumbed to those injuries while being treated at a
hospital, bringing the total number of victims to 22.



James Oliver Huberty entered the fast food restaurant armed with a long-
barreled Uzi, a pump-action shotgun and a handgun and took the lives of 21
adults and children and injured 19 others, including an elderly person and a
baby, according to The San Diego Tribune. An hour after the shootings, a
police sharpshooter killed Huberty, reported the Tribune. Before he went out
to commit mass murder, he reportedly told his wife, "I'm going hunting ...
hunting for humans," according to The New York Daily News.



A former student who had been expelled from a Florida high school returned to
the campus and opened fire both inside and outside of the school, at times
firing through the glass windows of classroom doors.



Authorities arrested 19-year-old Nikolas Cruz, who had been expelled from
Marjory Stoneman over disciplinary problems, in the aftermath of what has
become the deadliest school shooting since an attack on an elementary school
in Newtown, Connecticut, in 2012.



There were 17 people killed in the Valentine's Day shooting and more than a
dozen others were injured, some critically.



U.S. Marine sniper Charles Joseph Whitman lugged a cache of rifles, pistols
and a sawed-off shotgun up to the observation deck of the university's
landmark clock tower. He then fired at will, striking unsuspecting students.
He killed 14 people and wounded at least 30 others.



Whitman's terror was ultimately foiled after police officers Ramiro Martinez
and Houston McCoy shot him dead.



Including the murders of his wife and mother, whom he killed earlier that day,
the death toll stands at 16.



Husband and wife Syed Rizwan Farook, 28, and Tashfeen Malik, 27, dressed in
tactical gear and armed themselves with assault rifles and pistols when they
entered a mandatory Christmas party at a social services center where Syed
worked, fatally shot 14 of his unarmed colleagues and left at least 17 others
injured.



The couple  then fled the center and died in a hail of bullets on a San
Bernardino street when police caught up to their car.



On the day of the attack, FBI agents later confirmed, the couple researched
ISIS leader Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi online.



Patrick Henry Sherrill, 44, was a part-time postman who returned to his office
a day after receiving a poor performance review. Armed with three handguns, he
entered the federal building through the back and shot anyone in sight. He
murdered 14 fellow postal workers 10 minutes before fatally shooting himself
in the head. Authorities later determined Sherrill was angry that he might
lose his job.



 _ABC News' M.L. Nestel, Andrea Miller, and Chris Donovan contributed to this
report._



24/7 coverage of breaking news and live events

