Log In



FinPro



For Industry Professionals



Registered representatives can fulfill Continuing Education requirements, view
their industry CRD record and perform other compliance tasks.



FINRA Gateway



For Member Firms



Firm compliance professionals can access filings and requests, run reports and
submit support tickets.



DR Portal



For Case Participants



Arbitration and mediation case participants and FINRA neutrals can view case
information and submit documents through this Dispute Resolution Portal.



Need Help? | Check Systems Status



Log In to other FINRA systems



Rita De Ramos (646) 315-7255



WASHINGTON—FINRA announced today that it has fined Barclays Capital Inc.
(Barclays Capital) $2 million for failing to comply with its best execution
obligations in connection with its customers’ electronic equity orders.



From January 2014 through February 2019, Barclays Capital owned and operated
an alternative trading system known as LX. Barclays Capital routed all its
customers’ marketable orders to LX, prior to routing to any competing venue,
if the order could be filled in LX completely or partially at the National
Best Bid and Offer or better, unless customers opted out of this routing
preference.



Barclays Capital failed to conduct reasonable reviews of execution quality for
its customers’ orders. The firm did not review price improvement data for
orders routed to LX. The firm also did not review speed of execution for any
of the venues to which it routed customers’ orders or consider whether the
firm could have obtained better execution speed from competing markets.



Barclays Capital also failed to consider alternate routing arrangements even
when the firm’s own data showed that fill rates in LX were inferior to fill
rates at some competing venues. Specifically, the reports reviewed by the
firm’s Best Execution Working Group indicated that marketable orders routed to
LX received lower fill rates as compared to certain competing venues. These
reports showed that LX delivered a lower fill rate than the average fill rate
of competing venues for every quarter from 2015 to the first quarter of 2019.



In addition, Barclays Capital’s supervisory system was not reasonably designed
to achieve compliance with its best execution obligations because the firm
failed to reasonably review for price improvement for orders routed to LX and
speed of execution for any venue. The firm’s written supervisory procedures
also failed to provide reasonable guidance on the factors the firm should
consider in determining whether to modify its routing practices.



“FINRA continues to prioritize broker-dealers’ compliance with best execution
requirements when handling their customers’ orders,” said Jessica Hopper,
Executive Vice President and Head of FINRA’s Department of Enforcement. “Firms
must continuously monitor their reviews of execution quality and make changes
accordingly.”



FINRA Rule 5310—Best Execution—requires firms to seek the most favorable terms
reasonably available for their customers’ orders. To meet this obligation,
firms must conduct reviews to evaluate the order execution quality their
customers receive under the firm’s current routing arrangements, as well as
the execution quality their customer orders could receive through different
routing arrangements. Rule 5310 lists several factors that firms should
consider when conducting these reviews, including price improvement
opportunities and speed of execution.



FINRA included best execution as a topic in its 2022 and 2021 FINRA
Examination and Risk Monitoring Program reports, as well as its 2020 and 2019
Annual Risk Monitoring and Examination Priorities letters.



In settling this matter, Barclays Capital consented to the entry of FINRA’s
findings without admitting or denying them.



 **About FINRA**



FINRA is a not-for-profit organization dedicated to investor protection and
market integrity. It regulates one critical part of the securities
industry—brokerage firms doing business with the public in the United States.
FINRA, overseen by the SEC, writes rules, examines for and enforces compliance
with FINRA rules and federal securities laws, registers broker-dealer
personnel and offers them education and training, and informs the investing
public. In addition, FINRA provides surveillance and other regulatory services
for equities and options markets, as well as trade reporting and other
industry utilities. FINRA also administers a dispute resolution forum for
investors and brokerage firms and their registered employees. For more
information, visit www.finra.org.





Subscribe to Updates



ARBITRATION & MEDIATION



General Inquiries



Securities Helpline for Seniors®



File a Regulatory Tip



File an Investor Complaint



Small Firm Help Line



Office of the Ombudsman





© FINRA. All Rights Reserved.



FINRA IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF THE FINANCIAL INDUSTRY REGULATORY
AUTHORITY, INC.

