Jonathan Franklin



A Black man in Portland, Ore., has been awarded $4.4 million in a settlement
after a jury determined he was racially profiled while shopping at Walmart.
Here, the Walmart logo is seen outside a store in Burbank, Calif. **Robyn
Beck/AFP via Getty Images** ****hide caption****



A Black man in Portland, Ore., has been awarded $4.4 million in a settlement
after a jury determined he was racially profiled while shopping at Walmart.
Here, the Walmart logo is seen outside a store in Burbank, Calif.



A jury in Oregon has ordered Walmart to pay $4.4 million in damages to a Black
man who filed a lawsuit saying he was racially profiled and harassed by an
employee while shopping.



In a lawsuit filed against the retail giant last year, Michael Mangum alleges
that he was followed around a Walmart in Wood Village, Ore., back in March
2020 by one of the store's asset protection associates.



"Mr. Mangum was not acting violently, did not seem drunk or high, and told the
[911] operator, 'he just keeps checking me out,' " according to the criminal
complaint.



Mangum, in the amended complaint obtained by NPR, says he was asked to leave
once he confronted the security associate — identified in the complaint as Joe
Williams. During the altercation, Williams threatened to call authorities if
Mangum did not leave the store.



Mangum, who works as a counselor for at-risk youth in the Portland area,
refused to leave.



Mangum's lawyer Greg Kafoury told NPR Walmart should use the verdict to assess
its security practices and who is hired to carry out those duties.



"They don't have a role in their community. They don't care about the rights
of their customers," he said.



Randy Hargrove, Walmart's senior director for national media relations told
NPR in a statement, that the company believes the verdict is "excessive" and
is "not supported by the evidence."



"We do not tolerate discrimination. We believe the verdict is excessive and is
not supported by the evidence," Randy Hargrove said.



"Mr. Mangum was never stopped by Walmart's Asset Protection. He interfered
with our associates as they were surveilling and then stopped confirmed
shoplifters, and then refused to leave despite being asked to repeatedly by
our staff and Multnomah County, Ore., deputies," he added.



Hargrove said the retail giant is reviewing its options, including post-trial
motions.



Williams no longer works for Walmart, Hargrove said. The company did not go
into detail as to why or when Williams left his position.



According to The Associated Press, the store and Walmart corporate officials
kept Williams employed for several more months following the incident —
eventually terminating him in July 2020 for "mishandling $35 of Walmart
property."



Kafoury said the company's reaction over the lawsuit is disappointing, and it
should have taken more responsibility for Williams.



"Walmart's response to this verdict shows that they have no policy — or at
least no policy they're willing to enforce — to ensure the honesty and
integrity of their loss prevention [associates]," Kafoury said. "They don't
learn. They don't listen."



The retail giant has found itself facing similar accusations of racial
discrimination from customers.



Last year, two Black men in Texas filed a lawsuit against Walmart alleging
they were wrongfully accused of shoplifting when they tried to return a TV.
The men, Dennis Stewart and Terence Richardson, are asking for a jury trial in
addition to compensatory and punitive damages, according to NBC News.



Earlier this year, a Black man in Georgia also filed a lawsuit after being
handcuffed and accused of shoplifting by a loss prevention officer at a
Walmart in Fayetteville, according to _The Washington Post_.



Sponsor Message



Become an NPR sponsor

