The Taiwan Stock Exchange (TWSE) yesterday fined Hon Hai Precision Industry Co
(鴻海精密) NT$150,000 (US$5,010), saying that the iPhone assembler did not
disclose its plan to invest in Tsinghua Unigroup (紫光集團) as soon as the board
approved the deal, the agency said.



Hon Hai said in a July 14 filing to the TWSE that its subsidiary Foxconn
Industrial Internet Co Ltd (富士康工業互聯網) had invested 5.38 billion yuan (US$797
million) in the state-backed Chinese chip company through several smaller
investments in Chinese companies, a corporate data filing showed.



TWSE-listed companies should not postpone disclosing such major investments,
the local bourse said.



The fine came after the Ministry of Economic Affairs’ Investment Commission
said that it might fine Hon Hai, as the company invested in the chipmaker
before gaining regulatory approval in Taiwan, the Central News Agency
reported.



The fine for such a regulatory lapse would be NT$50,000 to NT$25 million,
ministry data showed.



The ministry said it received the application from Hon Hai on Tuesday last
week and has requested the company submit additional documents, as the
information provided was insufficient.



The ministry would determine whether Hon Hai’s investment in the Chinese chip
company involves component technologies for which additional rules apply, the
report said.



If it does, the investment would need to be scrutinized by a special
committee, the ministry said.



Oil dropped the most in a week since April as the full weight of languishing
Chinese demand and more economic tightening radically shifted the market’s
sentiment. West Texas Intermediate for December delivery fell 1.91 percent to
US$80.08 a barrel. US futures fell 9.98 percent this week, the most since US
President Joe Biden ordered a historic discharge of crude from the US’
Strategic Petroleum Reserve in April. Brent crude for December delivery
dropped 2.41 percent to US$87.62 a barrel, down 8.72 percent from a week
earlier. Swelling COVID-19 cases in China and aggressive monetary tightening
by central banks have combined to



SEEKING ENGINEERS: The Dutch chipmaking equipment supplier is planning to hire
2,000 workers for a planned campus in New Taipei City’s Linkou District Dutch
chipmaking equipment supplier ASML Holding NV is planning to offer NT$1.6
million (US$51,331) or more in starting annual pay to engineers with a
master’s degree at its sites in Taiwan. The major supplier to contract
chipmaker Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co (TSMC, 台積電) said it is keen to
offer competitive compensation comprised of salaries, bonuses and other
financial incentives as it seeks to expand its talent pool in Taiwan. The
company, which is planning to build a plant in New Taipei City, said engineers
would in their first year be granted 10 days annual leave, compared with the
minimum of three days



US and European start-ups are racing to develop new batteries using two
abundant, cheap materials — sodium and sulfur — that could reduce China’s
battery dominance, ease looming supply bottlenecks and lead to mass-market
electric vehicles (EVs). Today’s EVs run on lithium-ion batteries — mostly
made with lithium, cobalt, manganese and high-grade nickel, whose prices have
soared. Western producers are struggling to catch up with their Asian rivals,
and automakers expect supply bottlenecks to hit vehicle production at around
the middle of the decade. The EVs of the future — those arriving after 2025 —
could shift to sodium-ion or lithium-sulfur battery



‘CORRECT DIRECTION’: ASML said that it would keep investing globally,
including in Taiwan, to prepare to support customers and semiconductor
industry growth Netherlands-based ASML Holding NV, a leading global supplier
of chipmaking machinery, on Wednesday announced plans for a factory in New
Taipei City to support international customers and the development of the
semiconductor industry. ASML’s announcement came after President Tsai Ing-wen
(蔡英文) praised the company’s commitment to continuously investing in Taiwan at
a meeting on Tuesday with its chief operations officer, Frederic Schneider-
Maunoury. ASML continues to invest globally and in Taiwan to prepare for the
company’s continued growth, and to support global customers and the
development of the semiconductor industry, the company said in an e-mail reply
to Taiwanese media. Vice Premier Shen Jong-chin

