Company Filings



FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE  
2021-213



Washington D.C., Oct. 19, 2021 —



Credit Suisse Group AG has agreed to pay nearly $475 million to U.S. and U.K
authorities, including nearly $100 million to the Securities and Exchange
Commission, for fraudulently misleading investors and violating the Foreign
Corrupt Practices Act (FCPA) in a scheme involving two bond offerings and a
syndicated loan that raised funds on behalf of state-owned entities in
Mozambique.



According to the SEC's order, these transactions that raised over $1 billion
were used to perpetrate a hidden debt scheme, pay kickbacks to now-indicted
former Credit Suisse investment bankers along with their intermediaries, and
bribe corrupt Mozambique government officials. The SEC's order finds that the
offering materials created and distributed to investors by Credit Suisse hid
the underlying corruption and falsely disclosed that the proceeds would help
develop Mozambique's tuna fishing industry. Credit Suisse failed to disclose
the full extent and nature of Mozambique's indebtedness and the risk of
default arising from these transactions.



The SEC's order also finds that the scheme resulted from Credit Suisse's
deficient internal accounting controls, which failed to properly address
significant and known risks concerning bribery.



“When it comes to cross-border securities law violations, the SEC will
continue to work collaboratively with overseas law enforcement and regulatory
agencies to fulfill its Enforcement mission,” said Gurbir S. Grewal, Director
of the SEC’s Division of Enforcement. “Our action against Credit Suisse today
is yet another example of our close and successful coordination with
counterparts in Europe and Asia.”



"Credit Suisse provided investors with incomplete and misleading disclosures
despite being uniquely positioned to understand the full extent of
Mozambique's mounting debt and serious risk of default based on its prior
lending arrangements," said Anita B. Bandy, Associate Director of the SEC's
Division of Enforcement. "The massive offering fraud was also a consequence of
the bank's significant lapses in internal accounting controls and repeated
failure to respond to corruption risks."



A London-based subsidiary of Russian bank VTB separately agreed to pay more
than $6 million to settle SEC charges related to its role in misleading
investors in a second 2016 bond offering. According to the SEC's order, the
second offering as structured by VTB Capital and Credit Suisse allowed
investors to exchange their notes in an earlier bond offering for new
sovereign bonds issued directly by the government of Mozambique. But the SEC
found that the offering materials distributed and marketed by Credit Suisse
and VTB Capital failed to disclose the true nature of Mozambique's debt and
the high risk of default on the bonds. The offering materials further failed
to disclose Credit Suisse's discovery that significant funds from the earlier
offering had been diverted away from the intended use of proceeds that was
disclosed to investors. Mozambique later defaulted on the financings after the
full extent of "secret debt" was revealed.



The SEC's order against Credit Suisse finds that it violated antifraud
provisions as well as internal accounting controls and books and records
provisions of the federal securities laws. Credit Suisse agreed to pay
disgorgement and interest totaling more than $34 million and a penalty of $65
million to the SEC. As part of coordinated resolutions, the U.S. Department of
Justice imposed a $247 million criminal fine, with Credit Suisse paying, after
crediting, $175 million, and Credit Suisse also agreed to pay over $200
million in a penalty as part of a settled action with the United Kingdom's
Financial Conduct Authority.



VTB Capital consented to an SEC order finding that it violated negligence-
based antifraud provisions of the federal securities laws. Without admitting
or denying the findings, VTB Capital agreed to pay over $2.4 million in
disgorgement and interest along with a $4 million penalty.



The SEC's investigation was conducted by Lesley B. Atkins and Douglas C.
McAllister with assistance from Wendy Kong of the Office of Investigative and
Market Analytics, Carlos Costa-Rodriguez of the Office of International
Affairs, and supervisory trial counsel Tom Bednar. The case was supervised by
Ms. Bandy. The SEC appreciates the assistance of the U.S. Department of
Justice's Money Laundering and Asset Recovery Section and Fraud Section, the
U.S. Attorney's Office for the Eastern District of New York, the United
Kingdom's Financial Conduct Authority, the Swiss Financial Market Supervisory
Authority, and the United Arab Emirates Securities and Commodities Authority.



###



STAY CONNECTED  
1 Twitter 2 Facebook 3RSS 4YouTube  
6LinkedIn 8 Email Updates

