Use Google to translate the web site. We take no responsibility for the
accuracy of the translation.



Read this article in:



English



22 March, 2018IndustriALL Global Union is calling on the car industry to
pressure Glencore to clean up its operations in the Democratic Republic of
Congo (DRC), after revelations of dire working conditions at the company’s
cobalt mines in the country.



IndustriALL, which represents workers in the mining and auto industries, is
using its global trade union network of hundreds of auto unions to raise
awareness in the industry of Glencore’s mistreatment of cobalt workers in the
auto supply chain.



The auto industry is becoming increasingly dependent on cobalt, a critical
battery metal, as it ramps up production of electric vehicles. Glencore is the
world’s biggest supplier of cobalt.



A report from an IndustriALL fact-finding mission to DRC in February 2018,
reveals that workers mining cobalt at Glencore’s the Kamoto Copper Company and
Mutanda mines are only allowed 750ml of drinking water per 12-hour shift and
that Glencore provides expired food and no decent eating places with
protection against the elements.



There are no proper showers or ablution facilities at the mines risking
contamination and occupational respiratory diseases for workers and their
families: “We are so filthy when we get home that we cannot hug our children,”
said one worker.



The mission also found workers and their families have to travel 42 kilometres
to Glencore health facilities, meaning that they must leave in the early hours
of the morning only to return late at night, and in some instances without
being treated.



The mission took place at the urgent request of IndustriALL affiliate TUMEC in
DRC, which represents workers at both the Kamoto Copper Company and Mutanda
mines.



TUMEC is considering strike action over disparities in wages at Glencore’s
mines in DRC where, for instance, a white supervisor earns US$4,000 a month
and his immediate Congolese assistants earn US$600 a month.



The report outlines Glencore’s disrespect for the collective bargaining
agreement with TUMEC and its refusal to renegotiate. The mission also found
that there has been no salary increase for workers in five years.



Over 60 per cent of the global supply of cobalt comes from DRC, which is one
of the world’s poorest countries. Swiss-based Glencore expects demand for the
metal, which is also a key component for smart phone batteries, to increase by
67 per cent over the next three years. Cobalt prices have more than doubled in
the past year.



At the end of last year, the Drive Sustainability partnership, a group of the
world's leading car companies, including BMW, Volkswagen and Ford, launched a
new initiative to identify and address ethical, environmental, human, and
labour rights issues associated with the sourcing of raw materials.
IndustriALL is calling on all car manufacturers to carry out due diligence in
the sourcing of cobalt for the industry.



IndustriALL’s general secretary, Valter Sanches, said:



“Auto companies need to live up to their customers’ expectations that the
electric vehicles they sell are produced responsibly. Cobalt from Glencore,
which is so critical for the batteries in those electric vehicles, is anything
but.



“We’re not asking them to not buy from Glencore, we’re asking them to pressure
Glencore to live up to Glencore’s own claims to produce responsibly and to
respect workers’ rights and the communities where it operates.”



IndustriALL has written to the Glencore CEO, Ivan Glasenberg, with a list of
demands to redress the situation of workers at its mines in DRC.



Glencore employs about 15,000 people in DRC, through its subsidiaries Mutanda
Mining and Katanga Mining, which owns the Kamoto Copper Company. In 2016,
seven workers died at Katanga when the wall of an open pit mine collapsed.



Sub-Saharan Africa



Congo (DRC)



Press release



Supply chains



Mining and DGOJP



Glencore



Glencore



Health and safety



Convention 176 - Mine Safety



Multinational companies (MNCs)



Human & trade union rights



Workers' rights



IndustriALL Global Union’s affiliates represent over 50 million workers in 140
countries in the mining, energy and manufacturing sectors.



We take up the fight for better working conditions and trade union rights
around the world.



Join the movement and follow us on:



For questions and press enquiries:



© Copyright 2018 - IndustriALL - We care about your personal information and
data. Take a look at our Privacy Policy.

