_Workers cite subcontracting and lack of respect from the employer as key
issues in the dispute_



KATINNIQ/MONTREAL, Quebec--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The 630 unionized workers at the
Glencore-owned Raglan Mine in Nunavik, members of the Syndicat des
Métallos/United Steelworkers union, went on strike late Friday night, May 27.





A demand for genuine respect from Glencore is a major issue for the union
members, who often work 11-hour shifts, for 21 consecutive days, at the
isolated, fly-in/fly-out nickel mining operations in Nunavik. The increased
use of subcontractors, who work under inferior conditions at Raglan Mine, is
another key issue in the labour dispute.



“It has reached the point where there are often many more contractors at the
mine site than unionized workers. It doesn't make sense. This means fewer
economic benefits for the regions of Quebec, while this multinational
corporation extracts huge profits by exploiting our natural resources,” said
Eric Savard, president of Steelworkers Local 9449, which represents the
striking workers.



In addition to the shameful use of subcontractors, other stumbling blocks in
negotiations include vacations, working conditions and wages. Above all,
however, workers are demanding respect from Glencore.



“Glencore has been continually pushing the limits. It even balks at providing
a proper lunch hour to workers who are working 11 hours a day, 21 days in a
row. It’s reached the point where those who refuse to work overtime are given
the cold shoulder by the bosses. Living conditions at the mining camp have
deteriorated over the years. The employer systematically quibbles over the
living and working conditions of employees who are away from their families
for long periods of time. It’s time for this company to show greater respect
for the workers who are generating its profits of tens of millions of dollars
each year,” Savard added.



The parties met on Friday in the presence of a mediator, without breaking the
impasse in negotiations. The union members therefore decided to exercise their
strike mandate, which they had approved last week by an overwhelming majority
vote of 97.5%.



“We are faced with an employer who continually seeks to do as little as
possible to improve the quality of life of its workers. This employer has even
tried to divide the workers and turn them against each other. But today, union
members are united and have chosen to walk out, together. And it is united
that they will return to the mining camp when they receive the respect they
deserve from their employer,” said Steelworkers union representative Harold
Arsenault.



The Syndicat des Métallos/United Steelworkers, affiliated with the Quebec
Federation of Labour, is the largest private-sector union in Quebec,
representing more than 60,000 workers in all economic sectors.



Clairandrée Cauchy, 514 774-4001, ccauchy@metallos.ca



Workers cite subcontracting and lack of respect from the employer as key
issues in the dispute



Clairandrée Cauchy, 514 774-4001, ccauchy@metallos.ca

